This is Bill Lange. I'm Dave Gallo.
And we're going to tell you some stories from the sea here in video.
We've got some of the most incredible video of Titanic that's ever been seen, and we're not going to show you any of it.
The truth of the matter is that the Titanic -- even though it's breaking all sorts of box office records -- it's not the most exciting story from the sea.
And the problem, I think, is that we take the ocean for granted.
When you think about it, the oceans are 75 percent of the planet.
Most of the planet is ocean water.
The average depth is about two miles.
Part of the problem, I think, is we stand at the beach, or we see images like this of the ocean, and you look out at this great big blue expanse, and it's shimmering and it's moving and there's waves and there's surf and there's tides, but you have no idea for what lies in there.
And in the oceans, there are the longest mountain ranges on the planet.
Most of the animals are in the oceans.
Most of the earthquakes and volcanoes are in the sea, at the bottom of the sea.
The biodiversity and the biodensity in the ocean is higher, in places, than it is in the rainforests.
It's mostly unexplored, and yet there are beautiful sights like this that captivate us and make us become familiar with it.
But when you're standing at the beach, I want you to think that you're standing at the edge of a very unfamiliar world.
We have to have a very special technology to get into that unfamiliar world.
We use the submarine Alvin and we use cameras, and the cameras are something that Bill Lange has developed with the help of Sony.
Marcel Proust said, "The true voyage of discovery is not so much in seeking new landscapes as in having new eyes."
People that have partnered with us have given us new eyes, not only on what exists -- the new landscapes at the bottom of the sea -- but also how we think about life on the planet itself.
Here's a jelly.
It's one of my favorites, because it's got all sorts of working parts.
This turns out to be the longest creature in the oceans.
It gets up to about 150 feet long.
But see all those different working things?
I love that kind of stuff.
It's got these fishing lures on the bottom. They're going up and down.
It's got tentacles dangling, swirling around like that.
It's a colonial animal.
These are all individual animals banding together to make this one creature.
And it's got these jet thrusters up in front that it'll use in a moment, and a little light.
If you take all the big fish and schooling fish and all that, put them on one side of the scale, put all the jelly-type of animals on the other side, those guys win hands down.
Most of the biomass in the ocean is made out of creatures like this.
Here's the X-wing death jelly.
The bioluminescence -- they use the lights for attracting mates and attracting prey and communicating.
We couldn't begin to show you our archival stuff from the jellies.
They come in all different sizes and shapes.
We tend to forget about the fact that the ocean is miles deep on average, and that we're real familiar with the animals that are in the first 200 or 300 feet, but we're not familiar with what exists from there all the way down to the bottom.
And these are the types of animals that live in that three-dimensional space, that micro-gravity environment that we really haven't explored.
You hear about giant squid and things like that, but some of these animals get up to be approximately 140, 160 feet long.
They're very little understood.
This is one of them, another one of our favorites, because it's a little octopod.
You can actually see through his head.
And here he is, flapping with his ears and very gracefully going up.
We see those at all depths and even at the greatest depths.
They go from a couple of inches to a couple of feet.
They come right up to the submarine -- they'll put their eyes right up to the window and peek inside the sub.
This is really a world within a world, and we're going to show you two.
In this case, we're passing down through the mid-ocean and we see creatures like this.
This is kind of like an undersea rooster.
This guy, that looks incredibly formal, in a way.
And then one of my favorites. What a face!
This is basically scientific data that you're looking at.
It's footage that we've collected for scientific purposes.
And that's one of the things that Bill's been doing, is providing scientists with this first view of animals like this, in the world where they belong.
They don't catch them in a net.
They're actually looking at them down in that world.
We're going to take a joystick, sit in front of our computer, on the Earth, and press the joystick forward, and fly around the planet.
We're going to look at the mid-ocean ridge, a 40,000-mile long mountain range.
The average depth at the top of it is about a mile and a half.
And we're over the Atlantic -- that's the ridge right there -- but we're going to go across the Caribbean, Central America, and end up against the Pacific, nine degrees north.
We make maps of these mountain ranges with sound, with sonar, and this is one of those mountain ranges.
We're coming around a cliff here on the right.
The height of these mountains on either side of this valley is greater than the Alps in most cases.
And there's tens of thousands of those mountains out there that haven't been mapped yet.
This is a volcanic ridge.
We're getting down further and further in scale.
And eventually, we can come up with something like this.
This is an icon of our robot, Jason, it's called.
And you can sit in a room like this, with a joystick and a headset, and drive a robot like that around the bottom of the ocean in real time.
One of the things we're trying to do at Woods Hole with our partners is to bring this virtual world -- this world, this unexplored region -- back to the laboratory.
Because we see it in bits and pieces right now.
We see it either as sound, or we see it as video, or we see it as photographs, or we see it as chemical sensors, but we never have yet put it all together into one interesting picture.
Here's where Bill's cameras really do shine.
This is what's called a hydrothermal vent.
And what you're seeing here is a cloud of densely packed, hydrogen-sulfide-rich water coming out of a volcanic axis on the sea floor.
Gets up to 600, 700 degrees F, somewhere in that range.
So that's all water under the sea -- a mile and a half, two miles, three miles down.
And we knew it was volcanic back in the '60s, '70s.
And then we had some hint that these things existed all along the axis of it, because if you've got volcanism, water's going to get down from the sea into cracks in the sea floor, come in contact with magma, and come shooting out hot.
We weren't really aware that it would be so rich with sulfides, hydrogen sulfides.
We didn't have any idea about these things, which we call chimneys.
This is one of these hydrothermal vents.
Six hundred degree F water coming out of the Earth.
On either side of us are mountain ranges that are higher than the Alps, so the setting here is very dramatic.
The white material is a type of bacteria that thrives at 180 degrees C.
I think that's one of the greatest stories right now that we're seeing from the bottom of the sea, is that the first thing we see coming out of the sea floor after a volcanic eruption is bacteria.
And we started to wonder for a long time, how did it all get down there?
What we find out now is that it's probably coming from inside the Earth.
Not only is it coming out of the Earth -- so, biogenesis made from volcanic activity -- but that bacteria supports these colonies of life.
The pressure here is 4,000 pounds per square inch.
A mile and a half from the surface to two miles to three miles -- no sun has ever gotten down here.
All the energy to support these life forms is coming from inside the Earth -- so, chemosynthesis.
And you can see how dense the population is.
These are called tube worms.
These worms have no digestive system. They have no mouth.
But they have two types of gill structures.
One for extracting oxygen out of the deep-sea water, another one which houses this chemosynthetic bacteria, which takes the hydrothermal fluid -- that hot water that you saw coming out of the bottom -- and converts that into simple sugars that the tube worm can digest.
You can see, here's a crab that lives down there.
He's managed to grab a tip of these worms.
Now, they normally retract as soon as a crab touches them.
Oh! Good going.
So, as soon as a crab touches them, they retract down into their shells, just like your fingernails.
There's a whole story being played out here that we're just now beginning to have some idea of because of this new camera technology.
These worms live in a real temperature extreme.
Their foot is at about 200 degrees C and their head is out at three degrees C, so it's like having your hand in boiling water and your foot in freezing water.
That's how they like to live.
This is a female of this kind of worm.
And here's a male.
You watch. It doesn't take long before two guys here -- this one and one that will show up over here -- start to fight.
Everything you see is played out in the pitch black of the deep sea.
There are never any lights there, except the lights that we bring.
Here they go.
On one of the last dive series, we counted 200 species in these areas -- 198 were new, new species.
One of the big problems is that for the biologists working at these sites, it's rather difficult to collect these animals.
And they disintegrate on the way up, so the imagery is critical for the science.
Two octopods at about two miles depth.
This pressure thing really amazes me -- that these animals can exist there at a depth with pressure enough to crush the Titanic like an empty Pepsi can.
What we saw up till now was from the Pacific.
This is from the Atlantic. Even greater depth.
You can see this shrimp is harassing this poor little guy here, and he'll bat it away with his claw. Whack!
And the same thing's going on over here.
What they're getting at is that -- on the back of this crab -- the foodstuff here is this very strange bacteria that lives on the backs of all these animals.
And what these shrimp are trying to do is actually harvest the bacteria from the backs of these animals.
And the crabs don't like it at all.
These long filaments that you see on the back of the crab are actually created by the product of that bacteria.
So, the bacteria grows hair on the crab.
On the back, you see this again.
The red dot is the laser light of the submarine Alvin to give us an idea about how far away we are from the vents.
Those are all shrimp.
You see the hot water over here, here and here, coming out.
They're clinging to a rock face and actually scraping bacteria off that rock face.
Here's a tiny, little vent that's come out of the side of that pillar.
Those pillars get up to several stories.
So here, you've got this valley with this incredible alien landscape of pillars and hot springs and volcanic eruptions and earthquakes, inhabited by these very strange animals that live only on chemical energy coming out of the ground.
They don't need the sun at all.
You see this white V-shaped mark on the back of the shrimp?
It's actually a light-sensing organ.
It's how they find the hydrothermal vents.
The vents are emitting a black body radiation -- an IR signature -- and so they're able to find these vents at considerable distances.
All this stuff is happening along that 40,000-mile long mountain range that we're calling the ribbon of life, because just even today, as we speak, there's life being generated there from volcanic activity.
This is the first time we've ever tried this any place.
We're going to try to show you high definition from the Pacific.
We're moving up one of these pillars.
This one's several stories tall.
In it, you'll see that it's a habitat for a lot of different animals.
There's a funny kind of hot plate here, with vent water coming out of it.
So all of these are individual homes for worms.
Now here's a closer view of that community.
Here's crabs here, worms here.
There are smaller animals crawling around.
Here's pagoda structures.
I think this is the neatest-looking thing.
I just can't get over this -- that you've got these little chimneys sitting here smoking away.
This stuff is toxic as hell, by the way.
You could never get a permit to dump this in the ocean, and it's coming out all from it.
It's unbelievable. It's basically sulfuric acid, and it's being just dumped out, at incredible rates.
And animals are thriving -- and we probably came from here.
That's probably where we evolved from.
This bacteria that we've been talking about turns out to be the most simplest form of life found.
There are a number of groups that are proposing that life evolved at these vent sites.
Although the vent sites are short-lived -- an individual site may last only 10 years or so -- as an ecosystem they've been stable for millions -- well, billions -- of years.
It works too well. You see there're some fish inside here as well.
There's a fish sitting here.
Here's a crab with his claw right at the end of that tube worm, waiting for that worm to stick his head out.
The biologists right now cannot explain why these animals are so active.
The worms are growing inches per week!
I already said that this site, from a human perspective, is toxic as hell.
Not only that, but on top -- the lifeblood -- that plumbing system turns off every year or so.
Their plumbing system turns off, so the sites have to move.
And then there's earthquakes, and then volcanic eruptions, on the order of one every five years, that completely wipes the area out.
Despite that, these animals grow back in about a year's time.
You're talking about biodensities and biodiversity, again, higher than the rainforest that just springs back to life.
Is it sensitive? Yes.
Is it fragile? No, it's not really very fragile.
I'll end up with saying one thing.
There's a story in the sea, in the waters of the sea, in the sediments and the rocks of the sea floor.
It's an incredible story.
What we see when we look back in time, in those sediments and rocks, is a record of Earth history.
Everything on this planet -- everything -- works by cycles and rhythms.
The continents move apart. They come back together.
Oceans come and go. Mountains come and go. Glaciers come and go.
El Nino comes and goes. It's not a disaster, it's rhythmic.
What we're learning now, it's almost like a symphony.
It's just like music -- it really is just like music.
And what we're learning now is that you can't listen to a five-billion-year long symphony, get to today and say, "Stop! We want tomorrow's note to be the same as it was today."
It's absurd. It's just absurd.
So, what we've got to learn now is to find out where this planet's going at all these different scales and work with it.
Learn to manage it.
The concept of preservation is futile.
Conservation's tougher, but we can probably get there.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
I'm here today to start a revolution.
Now before you get up in arms, or you break into song, or you pick a favorite color, I want to define what I mean by revolution.
By revolution, I mean a drastic and far-reaching change in the way we think and behave -- the way we think and the way we behave.
Now why, Steve, why do we need a revolution?
We need a revolution because things aren't working; they're just not working.
And that makes me really sad because I'm sick and tired of things not working.
You know, I'm sick and tired of us not living up to our potential.
I'm sick and tired of us being last.
And we are last place in so many things -- for example, social factors.
We're last place in Europe in innovation.
There we are right at the end, right at the bottom, last place as a culture that doesn't value innovation.
We're last place in health care, and that's important for a sense of well-being.
And there we are, not just last in the E.U., we're last in Europe, at the very bottom.
And worst of all, it just came out three weeks ago, many of you have seen it, The Economist.
We're the saddest place on Earth, relative to GDP per capita -- the saddest place on Earth.
That's social. Let's look at education.
Where do we rank three weeks ago in another report by the OECD?
Last in reading, math and science. Last.
Business: The lowest perception in the E.U.
that entrepreneurs provide benefits to society.
Why as a result, what happens?
The lowest percentage of entrepreneurs starting businesses.
And this is despite the fact that everybody knows that small business is the engine of economies.
We hire the most people; we create the most taxes.
So if our engine's broken, guess what?
Last in Europe GDP per capita.
Last.
So it's no surprise, guys, that 62 percent of Bulgarians are not optimistic about the future.
We're unhappy, we have bad education, and we have the worst businesses.
And these are facts, guys.
This isn't story tale; it's not make-believe.
It's not.
It's not a conspiracy I have got against Bulgaria. These are facts.
So I think it should be really, really clear that our system is broken.
The way we think, the way we behave, our operating system of behaving is broken.
We need a drastic change in the way we think and behave to transform Bulgaria for the better, for ourselves, for our friends, for our family and for our future.
How did this happen?
Let's be positive now. We're going to get positive. How did this happen?
I think we're last because -- and this is going to be drastic to some of you -- because we are handicapping ourselves.
We're holding ourselves back because we don't value play.
I said "play," all right.
In case some of you forgot what play is, this is what play looks like.
Babies play, kids play, adults play.
We don't value play.
In fact, we devalue play.
And we devalue it in three areas.
Let's go back to the same three areas.
Social: 45 years of what?
Of communism -- of valuing the society and the state over the individual and squashing, inadvertently, creativity, individual self-expression and innovation.
And instead, what do we value?
Because it's shown the way we apply, generate and use knowledge is affected by our social and institutional context, which told us what in communism?
To be serious.
To be really, really serious.
It did.
Be serious.
I can't tell you how many times I've been scolded in the park for letting my kids play on the ground.
Heaven forbid they play in the dirt, the kal, or even worse, lokvi, water -- that will kill them.
I have been told by babas and dyados that we shouldn't let our kids play so much because life is serious and we need to train them for the seriousness of life.
We have a serious meme running through.
It's a social gene running through us.
It's a serious gene.
It's 45 years of it that's created what I call the "baba factor."
And here's how it works.
Step one: woman says, "I want to have a baby. Iskam baby."
Step two: we get the baby. Woohoo!
But then what happens in step three?
I want to go back to work because I need to further my career or I just want to go have coffees.
I'm going to give bebko to baba.
But we need to remember that baba's been infected by the serious meme for 45 years.
So what happens?
She passes that virus on to baby, and it takes a really, really, really long time -- as the redwood trees -- for that serious meme to get out of our operating system.
What happens then?
It goes into education where we have an antiquated education system that has little changed for 100 years, that values rote learning, memorization and standardization, and devalues self-expression, self-exploration, questioning, creativity and play.
It's a crap system.
True story: I went looking for a school for my kid.
We went to this prestigious little school and they say they're going to study math 10 times a week and science eight times a week and reading five times a day and all this stuff.
And we said, "Well what about play and recess?"
And they said, "Ha. There won't be a single moment in the schedule."
And we said, "He's five."
What a crime. What a crime.
And it's a crime that our education system is so serious because education is serious that we're creating mindless, robotic workers to put bolts in pre-drilled holes.
But I'm sorry, the problems of today are not the problems of the Industrial Revolution.
We need adaptability, the ability to learn how to be creative and innovative.
We don't need mechanized workers.
But no, now our meme goes into work where we don't value play.
We create robotic workers that we treat like assets, to lever and just throw away.
What are qualities of a Bulgarian work?
Autocratic -- do what I say because I'm the chef.
I'm the boss and I know better than you.
Untrusting -- you're obviously a criminal, so I'm going to install cameras.
Controlling -- you're obviously an idiot, so I'm going to make a zillion little processes for you to follow so you don't step out of the box.
So they're restrictive -- don't use your mobile phone, don't use your laptop, don't search the Internet, don't be on I.M.
That's somehow unprofessional and bad.
And at the end of the day, it's unfulfilling because you're controlled, you're restricted, you're not valued and you're not having any fun.
In social, in education and in our business, don't value play.
And that's why we're last, because we don't value play.
And you can say, "That's ridiculous, Steve. What a dumb idea.
It can't be because of play.
Just play, that's a stupid thing."
We have the serious meme in us.
Well I'm going to say no.
And I will prove it to you in the next part of the speech -- that play is the catalyst, it is the revolution, that we can use to transform Bulgaria for the better.
Play: our brains are hardwired for play.
Evolution has selected, over millions and billions of years, for play in animals and in humans.
And you know what?
Evolution does a really, really good job of deselecting traits that aren't advantageous to us and selecting traits for competitive advantage.
Nature isn't stupid, and it selected for play.
Throughout the animal kingdom, for example: ants. Ants play.
Maybe you didn't know that.
But when they're playing, they're learning the social order and dynamics of things.
Rats play, but what you might not have known is that rats that play more have bigger brains and they learn tasks better, skills.
Kittens play. We all know kittens play.
But what you may not know is that kittens deprived of play are unable to interact socially.
They can still hunt, but they can't be social.
Bears play.
But what you may not know is that bears that play more survive longer.
It's not the bears that learn how to fish better.
It's the ones that play more.
And a final really interesting study -- it's been shown, a correlation between play and brain size.
The more you play, the bigger the brains there are.
Dolphins, pretty big brains, play a lot.
But who do you think with the biggest brains are the biggest players?
Yours truly: humans.
Kids play, we play -- of every nationality, of every race, of every color, of every religion.
It's a universal thing -- we play.
And it's not just kids, it's adults too.
Really cool term: neoteny -- the retention of play and juvenile traits in adults.
And who are the biggest neotenists?
Humans. We play sports.
We do it for fun, or as Olympians, or as professionals.
We play musical instruments.
We dance, we kiss, we sing, we just goof around.
We're designed by nature to play from birth to old age.
We're designed to do that continuously -- to play and play a lot and not stop playing.
It is a huge benefit.
Just like there's benefits to animals, there's benefits to humans.
For example, it's been shown to stimulate neural growth in the amygdala, in the area where it controls emotions.
It's been shown to promote pre-frontal cortex development where a lot of cognition is happening.
As a result, what happens?
We develop more emotional maturity if we play more.
We develop better decision-making ability if we play more.
These guys are facts.
It's not fiction, it's not story tales, it's not make-believe; it's cold, hard science.
These are the benefits to play.
It is a genetic birthright that we have, like walking or speaking or seeing.
And if we handicap ourselves with play, we handicap ourselves as if we would with any other birthright that we have.
We hold ourselves back.
Little exercise just for a second: close your eyes and try to imagine a world without play.
Imagine a world without theater, without the arts, without song, without dancing, without soccer, without football, without laughter.
What does this world look like?
It's pretty bleak.
It's pretty glum.
Now imagine your workplace.
Is it fun? Is it playful?
Or maybe the workplace of your friends -- here we're forward thinking.
Is it fun? Is it playful?
Or is it crap? Is it autocratic, controlling, restrictive and untrusting and unfulfilling?
We have this concept that the opposite of play is work.
We even feel guilty if we're seen playing at work.
"Oh, my colleagues see me laughing. I must not have enough work," or, "Oh, I've got to hide because my boss might see me.
He's going to think I'm not working hard."
But I have news for you: our thinking is backwards.
The opposite of play is not work.
The opposite of play is depression. It's depression.
In fact, play improves our work.
Just like there's benefits for humans and animals, there's benefits for play at work.
For example, it stimulates creativity.
It increases our openness to change.
It improves our ability to learn.
It provides a sense of purpose and mastery -- two key motivational things that increase productivity, through play.
So before you start thinking of play as just not serious, play doesn't mean frivolous.
You know, the professional athlete that loves skiing, he's serious about it, but he loves it.
He's having fun, he's in the groove, he's in the flow.
A doctor might be serious, but laughter's still a great medicine.
Our thinking is backwards.
We shouldn't be feeling guilty.
We should be celebrating play.
Quick example from the corporate world.
FedEx, easy motto: people, service, profit.
If you treat your people like people, if you treat them great, they're happier, they're fulfilled, they have a sense of mastery and purpose.
What happens? They give better service -- not worse, but better.
And when customers call for service and they're dealing with happy people that can make decisions and are fulfilled, how do the customers feel? They feel great.
And what do great customers do, great-feeling customers?
They buy more of your service and they tell more of their friends, which leads to more profit.
People, service, profit.
Play increases productivity, not decreases.
And you're going to say, "Gee, that can work for FedEx out there in the United States, but it can't work in Bulgaria.
No way. We're different."
It does work in Bulgaria, you guys. Two reasons.
One, play is universal.
There's nothing weird about Bulgarians that we can't play, besides the serious meme that we have to kick out.
Two, I've tried it. I've tried at Sciant.
When I got there, we had zero happy customers.
Not one customer would refer us.
I asked them all.
We had marginal profit -- I did.
We had marginal profits, and we had unhappy stakeholders.
Through some basic change, change like improving transparency, change like promoting self-direction and collaboration, encouraging collaboration, not autocracy, the things like having a results-focus.
I don't care when you get in in the morning. I don't care when you leave.
I care that your customer and your team is happy and you're organized with that.
Why do I care if you get in at nine o'clock?
Basically promoting fun.
Through promoting fun and a great environment, we were able to transform Sciant and, in just three short years -- sounds like a long time, but change is slow -- every customer, from zero to every customer referring us, above average profits for the industry and happy stakeholders.
And you can say, "Well how do you know they're happy?"
Well we did win, every year that we entered, one of the rankings for best employer for small business.
Independent analysis from anonymous employees on their surveys.
It does, and it can, work in Bulgaria.
There's nothing holding us back, except our own mentality about play.
So some steps that we can take -- to finish up -- how to make this revolution through play.
First of all, you have to believe me.
If you don't believe me, well just go home and think about it some more or something.
Second of all, if you don't have the feeling of play in you, you need to rediscover play.
Whatever it was that as a kid you used to enjoy, that you enjoyed only six months ago, but now that you've got that promotion you can't enjoy, because you feel like you have to be serious, rediscover it.
I don't care if it's mountain biking or reading a book or playing a game.
Rediscover that because you're the leaders, the innovation leaders, the thought leaders.
You're the ones that have to go back to the office or talk to your friends and ignite the fire of change in the play revolution.
You guys have to, and if you're not feeling it, your colleagues, your employees, aren't going to feel it.
You've got to go back and say, "Hey, I'm going to trust you."
Weird concept: I hired you; I should trust you.
I'm going to let you make decisions. I'm going to empower you, and I'm going to delegate to the lowest level, rather than the top.
I'm going to encourage constructive criticism.
I'm going to let you challenge authority.
Because it's by challenging the way things are always done is that we are able to break out of the rut that we're in and create innovative solutions to problems of today.
We're not always right as leaders.
We're going to eradicate fear.
Fear is the enemy of play.
And we're going to do things like eliminate restrictions.
You know what, let them use their mobile phone for personal calls -- heaven forbid.
Let them be on the Internet.
Let them be on instant messengers.
Let them take long lunches.
Lunch is like the recess for work.
It's when you go out in the world and you recharge your brain, you meet your friends, you have a beer, you have some food, you talk, you get some synergy of ideas that maybe you wouldn't have had before.
Let them do it. Give them some freedom, and in general, let them play. Let them have fun at the workplace.
We spend so much of our lives at the workplace, and it's supposed to be, what, a miserable grind, so that 20 years from now, we wake up and say, "Is this it?
Is that all there was?"
Unacceptable. Nepriemliv.
So in summary, we need a drastic change in the way we think and behave, but we don't need a workers' revolution.
We don't need a workers' revolution.
What we need is a players' uprising.
What we need is a players' uprising.
What we need is a players' uprising.
Seriously, we need to band together.
Today is the start of the uprising.
But what you need to do is fan the flames of the revolution.
You need to go and share your ideas and your success stories of what worked about reinvigorating our lives, our schools, and our work with play; about how play promotes a sense of promise and self-fulfillment; of how play promotes innovation and productivity, and, ultimately, how play creates meaning.
Because we can't do it alone. We have to do it together, and together, if we do this and share these ideas on play, we can transform Bulgaria for the better.
Thank you.
Radical openness is still a distant future in the field of school education.
We have such a hard time figuring out that learning is not a place but an activity.
But I want to tell you the story of PISA, OECD's test to measure the knowledge and skills of 15-year-olds around the world, and it's really a story of how international comparisons have globalized the field of education that we usually treat as an affair of domestic policy.
Look at how the world looked in the 1960s, in terms of the proportion of people who had completed high school.
You can see the United States ahead of everyone else, and much of the economic success of the United States draws on its long-standing advantage as the first mover in education.
But in the 1970s, some countries caught up.
In the 1980s, the global expansion of the talent pool continued.
And the world didn't stop in the 1990s.
So in the '60s, the U.S. was first.
In the '90s, it was 13th, and not because standards had fallen, but because they had risen so much faster elsewhere.
Korea shows you what's possible in education.
Two generations ago, Korea had the standard of living of Afghanistan today, and was one of the lowest education performers.
Today, every young Korean finishes high school.
So this tells us that, in a global economy, it is no longer national improvement that's the benchmark for success, but the best performing education systems internationally.
The trouble is that measuring how much time people spend in school or what degree they have got is not always a good way of seeing what they can actually do.
Look at the toxic mix of unemployed graduates on our streets, while employers say they cannot find the people with the skills they need.
And that tells you that better degrees don't automatically translate into better skills and better jobs and better lives.
So with PISA, we try to change this by measuring the knowledge and skills of people directly.
And we took a very special angle to this.
We were less interested in whether students can simply reproduce what they have learned in school, but we wanted to test whether they can extrapolate from what they know and apply their knowledge in novel situations.
Now, some people have criticized us for this.
They say, you know, such a way of measuring outcomes is terribly unfair to people, because we test students with problems they haven't seen before.
But if you take that logic, you know, you should consider life unfair, because the test of truth in life is not whether we can remember what we learned in school, but whether we are prepared for change, whether we are prepared for jobs that haven't been created, to use technologies that haven't been invented, to solve problems we just can't anticipate today.
And once hotly contested, our way of measuring outcomes has actually quickly become the standard.
In our latest assessment in 2009, we measured 74 school systems that together cover 87 percent of the economy.
This chart shows you the performance of countries.
In red, sort of below OECD average.
Yellow is so-so, and in green are the countries doing really well.
You can see Shanghai, Korea, Singapore in Asia; Finland in Europe; Canada in North America doing really well.
You can also see that there is a gap of almost three and a half school years between 15-year-olds in Shanghai and 15-year-olds in Chile, and the gap grows to seven school years when you include the countries with really poor performance.
There's a world of difference in the way in which young people are prepared for today's economy.
But I want to introduce a second important dimension into this picture.
Educators like to talk about equity.
With PISA, we wanted to measure how they actually deliver equity, in terms of ensuring that people from different social backgrounds have equal chances.
And we see that in some countries, the impact of social background on learning outcomes is very, very strong.
Opportunities are unequally distributed.
A lot of potential of young children is wasted.
We see in other countries that it matters much less into which social context you're born.
We all want to be there, in the upper right quadrant, where performance is strong and learning opportunities are equally distributed.
Nobody, and no country, can afford to be there, where performance is poor and there are large social disparities.
And then we can debate, you know, is it better to be there, where performance is strong at the price of large disparities?
Or do we want to focus on equity and accept mediocrity?
But actually, if you look at how countries come out on this picture, you see there are a lot of countries that actually are combining excellence with equity.
In fact, one of the most important lessons from this comparison is that you don't have to compromise equity to achieve excellence.
These countries have moved on from providing excellence for just some to providing excellence for all, a very important lesson.
And that also challenges the paradigms of many school systems that believe they are mainly there to sort people.
And ever since those results came out, policymakers, educators, researchers from around the world have tried to figure out what's behind the success of those systems.
But let's step back for a moment and focus on the countries that actually started PISA, and I'm giving them a colored bubble now.
And I'm making the size of the bubble proportional to the amount of money that countries spent on students.
If money would tell you everything about the quality of learning outcomes, you would find all the large bubbles at the top, no?
But that's not what you see.
Spending per student only explains about, well, less than 20 percent of the performance variation among countries, and Luxembourg, for example, the most expensive system, doesn't do particularly well.
What you see is that two countries with similar spending achieve very different results.
You also see -- and I think that's one of the most encouraging findings -- that we no longer live in a world that is neatly divided between rich and well-educated countries, and poor and badly-educated ones, a very, very important lesson.
Let's look at this in greater detail.
The red dot shows you spending per student relative to a country's wealth.
One way you can spend money is by paying teachers well, and you can see Korea investing a lot in attracting the best people into the teaching profession.
And Korea also invests into long school days, which drives up costs further.
Last but not least, Koreans want their teachers not only to teach but also to develop.
They invest in professional development and collaboration and many other things.
All that costs money.
How can Korea afford all of this?
The answer is, students in Korea learn in large classes.
This is the blue bar which is driving costs down.
You go to the next country on the list, Luxembourg, and you can see the red dot is exactly where it is for Korea, so Luxembourg spends the same per student as Korea does.
But, you know, parents and teachers and policymakers in Luxembourg all like small classes.
You know, it's very pleasant to walk into a small class.
So they have invested all their money into there, and the blue bar, class size, is driving costs up.
But even Luxembourg can spend its money only once, and the price for this is that teachers are not paid particularly well.
Students don't have long hours of learning.
And basically, teachers have little time to do anything else than teaching.
So you can see two countries spent their money very differently, and actually how they spent their money matters a lot more than how much they invest in education.
Let's go back to the year 2000.
Remember, that was the year before the iPod was invented.
This is how the world looked then in terms of PISA performance.
The first thing you can see is that the bubbles were a lot smaller, no?
We spent a lot less on education, about 35 percent less on education.
So you ask yourself, if education has become so much more expensive, has it become so much better?
And the bitter truth really is that, you know, not in many countries.
But there are some countries which have seen impressive improvements.
Germany, my own country, in the year 2000, featured in the lower quadrant, below average performance, large social disparities.
And remember, Germany, we used to be one of those countries that comes out very well when you just count people who have degrees.
Very disappointing results.
People were stunned by the results.
And for the very first time, the public debate in Germany was dominated for months by education, not tax, not other kinds of issues, but education was the center of the public debate.
And then policymakers began to respond to this.
The federal government dramatically raised its investment in education.
A lot was done to increase the life chances of students with an immigrant background or from social disadvantage.
And what's really interesting is that this wasn't just about optimizing existing policies, but data transformed some of the beliefs and paradigms underlying German education.
For example, traditionally, the education of the very young children was seen as the business of families, and you would have cases where women were seen as neglecting their family responsibilities when they sent their children to kindergarten.
PISA has transformed that debate, and pushed early childhood education right at the center of public policy in Germany.
Or traditionally, the German education divides children at the age of 10, very young children, between those deemed to pursue careers of knowledge workers and those who would end up working for the knowledge workers, and that mainly along socioeconomic lines, and that paradigm is being challenged now too.
A lot of change.
And the good news is, nine years later, you can see improvements in quality and equity.
People have taken up the challenge, done something about it.
Or take Korea, at the other end of the spectrum.
In the year 2000, Korea did already very well, but the Koreans were concerned that only a small share of their students achieved the really high levels of excellence.
They took up the challenge, and Korea was able to double the proportion of students achieving excellence in one decade in the field of reading.
Well, if you only focus on your brightest students, you know what happens is disparities grow, and you can see this bubble moving slightly to the other direction, but still, an impressive improvement.
A major overhaul of Poland's education helped to dramatically reduce between variability among schools, turn around many of the lowest-performing schools, and raise performance by over half a school year.
And you can see other countries as well.
Portugal was able to consolidate its fragmented school system, raise quality and improve equity, and so did Hungary.
So what you can actually see, there's been a lot of change.
And even those people who complain and say that the relative standing of countries on something like PISA is just an artifact of culture, of economic factors, of social issues, of homogeneity of societies, and so on, these people must now concede that education improvement is possible.
You know, Poland hasn't changed its culture.
It didn't change its economy. It didn't change the compositions of its population.
It didn't fire its teachers. It changed its education policies and practice. Very impressive.
And all that raises, of course, the question: What can we learn from those countries in the green quadrant who have achieved high levels of equity, high levels of performance, and raised outcomes?
And, of course, the question is, can what works in one context provide a model elsewhere?
Of course, you can't copy and paste education systems wholesale, but these comparisons have identified a range of factors that high-performing systems share.
Everybody agrees that education is important.
Everybody says that.
But the test of truth is, how do you weigh that priority against other priorities?
How do countries pay their teachers relative to other highly skilled workers?
Would you want your child to become a teacher rather than a lawyer?
How do the media talk about schools and teachers?
Those are the critical questions, and what we have learned from PISA is that, in high-performing education systems, the leaders have convinced their citizens to make choices that value education, their future, more than consumption today.
And you know what's interesting? You won't believe it, but there are countries in which the most attractive place to be is not the shopping center but the school.
Those things really exist.
But placing a high value on education is just part of the picture.
The other part is the belief that all children are capable of success.
You have some countries where students are segregated early in their ages.
You know, students are divided up, reflecting the belief that only some children can achieve world-class standards.
But usually that is linked to very strong social disparities.
If you go to Japan in Asia, or Finland in Europe, parents and teachers in those countries expect every student to succeed, and you can see that actually mirrored in student behavior.
When we asked students what counts for success in mathematics, students in North America would typically tell us, you know, it's all about talent.
If I'm not born as a genius in math, I'd better study something else.
Nine out of 10 Japanese students say that it depends on my own investment, on my own effort, and that tells you a lot about the system that is around them.
In the past, different students were taught in similar ways.
High performers on PISA embrace diversity with differentiated pedagogical practices.
They realize that ordinary students have extraordinary talents, and they personalize learning opportunities.
High-performing systems also share clear and ambitious standards across the entire spectrum.
Every student knows what matters.
Every student knows what's required to be successful.
And nowhere does the quality of an education system exceed the quality of its teachers.
High-performing systems are very careful in how they recruit and select their teachers and how they train them.
They watch how they improve the performances of teachers in difficulties who are struggling, and how they structure teacher pay.
They provide an environment also in which teachers work together to frame good practice.
And they provide intelligent pathways for teachers to grow in their careers.
In bureaucratic school systems, teachers are often left alone in classrooms with a lot of prescription on what they should be teaching.
High-performing systems are very clear what good performance is.
They set very ambitious standards, but then they enable their teachers to figure out, what do I need to teach to my students today?
The past was about delivered wisdom in education.
Now the challenge is to enable user-generated wisdom.
High performers have moved on from professional or from administrative forms of accountability and control -- sort of, how do you check whether people do what they're supposed to do in education -- to professional forms of work organization.
They enable their teachers to make innovations in pedagogy.
They provide them with the kind of development they need to develop stronger pedagogical practices.
The goal of the past was standardization and compliance.
High-performing systems have made teachers and school principals inventive.
In the past, the policy focus was on outcomes, on provision.
The high-performing systems have helped teachers and school principals to look outwards to the next teacher, the next school around their lives.
And the most impressive outcomes of world-class systems is that they achieve high performance across the entire system.
You've seen Finland doing so well on PISA, but what makes Finland so impressive is that only five percent of the performance variation amongst students lies between schools.
Every school succeeds.
This is where success is systemic.
And how do they do that?
They invest resources where they can make the most difference.
They attract the strongest principals into the toughest schools, and the most talented teachers into the most challenging classroom.
Last but not least, those countries align policies across all areas of public policy.
They make them coherent over sustained periods of time, and they ensure that what they do is consistently implemented.
Now, knowing what successful systems are doing doesn't yet tell us how to improve.
That's also clear, and that's where some of the limits of international comparisons of PISA are.
That's where other forms of research need to kick in, and that's also why PISA doesn't venture into telling countries what they should be doing.
But its strength lies in telling them what everybody else has been doing.
And the example of PISA shows that data can be more powerful than administrative control of financial subsidy through which we usually run education systems.
You know, some people argue that changing educational administration is like moving graveyards.
You just can't rely on the people out there to help you with this.
But PISA has shown what's possible in education.
It has helped countries to see that improvement is possible.
It has taken away excuses from those who are complacent.
And it has helped countries to set meaningful targets in terms of measurable goals achieved by the world's leaders.
If we can help every child, every teacher, every school, every principal, every parent see what improvement is possible, that only the sky is the limit to education improvement, we have laid the foundations for better policies and better lives.
Thank you.
I'd like to talk to you today about the scale of the scientific effort that goes into making the headlines you see in the paper.
Headlines that look like this when they have to do with climate change, and headlines that look like this when they have to do with air quality or smog.
They are both two branches of the same field of atmospheric science.
Recently the headlines looked like this when the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, or IPCC, put out their report on the state of understanding of the atmospheric system.
That report was written by 620 scientists from 40 countries.
They wrote almost a thousand pages on the topic.
And all of those pages were reviewed by another 400-plus scientists and reviewers, from 113 countries.
It's a big community. It's such a big community, in fact, that our annual gathering is the largest scientific meeting in the world.
Over 15,000 scientists go to San Francisco every year for that.
And every one of those scientists is in a research group, and every research group studies a wide variety of topics.
For us at Cambridge, it's as varied as the El Nio oscillation, which affects weather and climate, to the assimilation of satellite data, to emissions from crops that produce biofuels, which is what I happen to study.
And in each one of these research areas, of which there are even more, there are PhD students, like me, and we study incredibly narrow topics, things as narrow as a few processes or a few molecules.
And one of the molecules I study is called isoprene, which is here. It's a small organic molecule. You've probably never heard of it.
The weight of a paper clip is approximately equal to 900 zeta-illion -- 10 to the 21st -- molecules of isoprene.
But despite its very small weight, enough of it is emitted into the atmosphere every year to equal the weight of all the people on the planet.
It's a huge amount of stuff. It's equal to the weight of methane.
And because it's so much stuff, it's really important for the atmospheric system.
Because it's important to the atmospheric system, we go to all lengths to study this thing.
We blow it up and look at the pieces.
This is the EUPHORE Smog Chamber in Spain.
Atmospheric explosions, or full combustion, takes about 15,000 times longer than what happens in your car.
But still, we look at the pieces.
We run enormous models on supercomputers; this is what I happen to do.
Our models have hundreds of thousands of grid boxes calculating hundreds of variables each, on minute timescales.
And it takes weeks to perform our integrations.
And we perform dozens of integrations in order to understand what's happening.
We also fly all over the world looking for this thing.
I recently joined a field campaign in Malaysia. There are others.
We found a global atmospheric watchtower there, in the middle of the rainforest, and hung hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of scientific equipment off this tower, to look for isoprene, and of course, other things while we were there.
This is the tower in the middle of the rainforest, from above.
And this is the tower from below.
And on part of that field campaign we even brought an aircraft with us.
And this plane, the model, BA146, which was run by FAAM, normally flies 120 to 130 people.
So maybe you took a similar aircraft to get here today.
But we didn't just fly it. We were flying at 100 meters above the top of the canopy to measure this molecule -- incredibly dangerous stuff.
We have to fly at a special incline in order to make the measurements.
We hire military and test pilots to do the maneuvering.
We have to get special flight clearance.
And as you come around the banks in these valleys, the forces can get up to two Gs.
And the scientists have to be completely harnessed in in order to make measurements while they're on board.
So, as you can imagine, the inside of this aircraft doesn't look like any plane you would take on vacation.
It's a flying laboratory that we took to make measurements in the region of this molecule.
We do all of this to understand the chemistry of one molecule.
And when one student like me has some sort of inclination or understanding about that molecule, they write one scientific paper on the subject.
And out of that field campaign we'll probably get a few dozen papers on a few dozen processes or molecules.
And as a body of knowledge builds up, it will form one subsection, or one sub-subsection of an assessment like the IPCC, although we have others.
And each one of the 11 chapters of the IPCC has six to ten subsections.
So you can imagine the scale of the effort.
In each one of those assessments that we write, we always tag on a summary, and the summary is written for a non-scientific audience.
And we hand that summary to journalists and policy makers, in order to make headlines like these.
Thank you very much.
Hi. I'm going to ask you to raise your arms and wave back, just the way I am -- kind of a royal wave.
You can mimic what you can see.
You can program the hundreds of muscles in your arm.
Soon, you'll be able to look inside your brain and program, control the hundreds of brain areas that you see there.
I'm going to tell you about that technology.
People have wanted to look inside the human mind, the human brain, for thousands of years.
Well, coming out of the research labs just now, for our generation, is the possibility to do that.
People envision this as being very difficult.
You had to take a spaceship, shrink it down, inject it into the bloodstream.
It was terribly dangerous.
You could be attacked by white blood cells in the arteries.
But now, we have a real technology to do this.
We're going to fly into my colleague Peter's brain.
We're going to do it non-invasively using MRI.
We don't have to inject anything. We don't need radiation.
We will be able to fly into the anatomy of Peter's brain -- literally, fly into his body -- but more importantly, we can look into his mind.
When Peter moves his arm, that yellow spot you see there is the interface to the functioning of Peter's mind taking place.
Now you've seen before that with electrodes you can control robotic arms, that brain imaging and scanners can show you the insides of brains.
What's new is that that process has typically taken days or months of analysis.
We've collapsed that through technology to milliseconds, and that allows us to let Peter to look at his brain in real time as he's inside the scanner.
He can look at these 65,000 points of activation per second.
If he can see this pattern in his own brain, he can learn how to control it.
There have been three ways to try to impact the brain: the therapist's couch, pills and the knife.
This is a fourth alternative that you are soon going to have.
We all know that as we form thoughts, they form deep channels in our minds and in our brains.
Chronic pain is an example. If you burn yourself, you pull your hand away.
But if you're still in pain in six months' or six years' time, it's because these circuits are producing pain that's no longer helping you.
If we can look at the activation in the brain that's producing the pain, we can form 3D models and watch in real time the brain process information, and then we can select the areas that produce the pain.
So put your arms back up and flex your bicep.
Now imagine that you will soon be able to look inside your brain and select brain areas to do that same thing.
What you're seeing here is, we've selected the pathways in the brain of a chronic pain patient.
This may shock you, but we're literally reading this person's brain in real time.
They're watching their own brain activation, and they're controlling the pathway that produces their pain.
They're learning to flex this system that releases their own endogenous opiates.
As they do it, in the upper left is a display that's yoked to their brain activation of their own pain being controlled.
When they control their brain, they can control their pain.
This is an investigational technology, but, in clinical trials, we're seeing a 44 to 64 percent decrease in chronic pain patients.
This is not "The Matrix." You can only do this to yourself. You take control.
I've seen inside my brain. You will too, soon.
When you do, what do you want to control?
You will be able to look at all the aspects that make you yourself, all your experiences.
These are some of the areas we're working on today that I don't have time to go into in detail.
But I want to leave with you the big question.
We are the first generation that's going to be able to enter into, using this technology, the human mind and brain.
Where will we take it?
Evidence suggests that humans in all ages and from all cultures create their identity in some kind of narrative form.
From mother to daughter, preacher to congregant, teacher to pupil, storyteller to audience.
Whether in cave paintings or the latest uses of the Internet, human beings have always told their histories and truths through parable and fable.
We are inveterate storytellers.
But where, in our increasingly secular and fragmented world, do we offer communality of experience, unmediated by our own furious consumerism?
And what narrative, what history, what identity, what moral code are we imparting to our young?
Cinema is arguably the 20th century's most influential art form.
Its artists told stories across national boundaries, in as many languages, genres and philosophies as one can imagine.
Indeed, it is hard to find a subject that film has yet to tackle.
During the last decade we've seen a vast integration of global media, now dominated by a culture of the Hollywood blockbuster.
We are increasingly offered a diet in which sensation, not story, is king.
What was common to us all 40 years ago -- the telling of stories between generations -- is now rarified.
As a filmmaker, it worried me.
As a human being, it puts the fear of God in me.
What future could the young build with so little grasp of where they've come from and so few narratives of what's possible?
The irony is palpable; technical access has never been greater, cultural access never weaker.
And so in 2006 we set up FILMCLUB, an organization that ran weekly film screenings in schools followed by discussions.
If we could raid the annals of 100 years of film, maybe we could build a narrative that would deliver meaning to the fragmented and restless world of the young.
Given the access to technology, even a school in a tiny rural hamlet could project a DVD onto a white board.
In the first nine months we ran 25 clubs across the U.K., with kids in age groups between five and 18 watching a film uninterrupted for 90 minutes.
The films were curated and contextualized.
But the choice was theirs, and our audience quickly grew to choose the richest and most varied diet that we could provide.
The outcome, immediate.
It was an education of the most profound and transformative kind.
In groups as large as 150 and as small as three, these young people discovered new places, new thoughts, new perspectives.
By the time the pilot had finished, we had the names of a thousand schools that wished to join.
The film that changed my life is a 1951 film by Vittorio De Sica, "Miracle in Milan."
It's a remarkable comment on slums, poverty and aspiration.
I had seen the film on the occasion of my father's 50th birthday.
Technology then meant we had to hire a viewing cinema, find and pay for the print and the projectionist.
But for my father, the emotional and artistic importance of De Sica's vision was so great that he chose to celebrate his half-century with his three teenage children and 30 of their friends, "In order," he said, "to pass the baton of concern and hope on to the next generation."
In the last shot of "Miracle in Milan," slum-dwellers float skyward on flying brooms.
Sixty years after the film was made and 30 years after I first saw it, I see young faces tilt up in awe, their incredulity matching mine.
And the speed with which they associate it with "Slumdog Millionaire" or the favelas in Rio speaks to the enduring nature.
In a FILMCLUB season about democracy and government, we screened "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington."
Made in 1939, the film is older than most of our members' grandparents.
Frank Capra's classic values independence and propriety.
It shows how to do right, how to be heroically awkward.
It is also an expression of faith in the political machine as a force of honor.
Shortly after "Mr. Smith" became a FILMCLUB classic, there was a week of all-night filibustering in the House of Lords.
And it was with great delight that we found young people up and down the country explaining with authority what filibustering was and why the Lords might defy their bedtime on a point of principle.
After all, Jimmy Stewart filibustered for two entire reels.
In choosing "Hotel Rwanda," they explored genocide of the most brutal kind.
It provoked tears as well as incisive questions about unarmed peace-keeping forces and the double-dealing of a Western society that picks its moral fights with commodities in mind.
And when "Schindler's List" demanded that they never forget, one child, full of the pain of consciousness, remarked, "We already forgot, otherwise how did 'Hotel Rwanda' happen?"
As they watch more films their lives got palpably richer.
"Pickpocket" started a debate about criminality disenfranchisement.
"To Sir, with Love" ignited its teen audience.
They celebrated a change in attitude towards non-white Britons, but railed against our restless school system that does not value collective identity, unlike that offered by Sidney Poitier's careful tutelage.
By now, these thoughtful, opinionated, curious young people thought nothing of tackling films of all forms -- black and white, subtitled, documentary, non-narrative, fantasy -- and thought nothing of writing detailed reviews that competed to favor one film over another in passionate and increasingly sophisticated prose.
Six thousand reviews each school week vying for the honor of being review of the week.
From 25 clubs, we became hundreds, then thousands, until we were nearly a quarter of a million kids in 7,000 clubs right across the country.
And although the numbers were, and continue to be, extraordinary, what became more extraordinary was how the experience of critical and curious questioning translated into life.
Some of our kids started talking with their parents, others with their teachers, or with their friends.
And those without friends started making them.
The films provided communality across all manner of divide.
And the stories they held provided a shared experience.
"Persepolis" brought a daughter closer to her Iranian mother, and "Jaws" became the way in which one young boy was able to articulate the fear he'd experienced in flight from violence that killed first his father then his mother, the latter thrown overboard on a boat journey.
Who was right, who wrong?
What would they do under the same conditions?
Was the tale told well?
Was there a hidden message?
How has the world changed? How could it be different?
A tsunami of questions flew out of the mouths of children who the world didn't think were interested.
And they themselves had not known they cared.
And as they wrote and debated, rather than seeing the films as artifacts, they began to see themselves.
I have an aunt who is a wonderful storyteller.
In a moment she can invoke images of running barefoot on Table Mountain and playing cops and robbers.
Quite recently she told me that in 1948, two of her sisters and my father traveled on a boat to Israel without my grandparents.
When the sailors mutinied at sea in a demand for humane conditions, it was these teenagers that fed the crew.
I was past 40 when my father died.
He never mentioned that journey.
My mother's mother left Europe in a hurry without her husband, but with her three-year-old daughter and diamonds sewn into the hem of her skirt.
After two years in hiding, my grandfather appeared in London.
He was never right again.
And his story was hushed as he assimilated.
My story started in England with a clean slate and the silence of immigrant parents.
I had "Anne Frank," "The Great Escape," "Shoah," "Triumph of the Will."
It was Leni Riefenstahl in her elegant Nazi propaganda who gave context to what the family had to endure.
These films held what was too hurtful to say out loud, and they became more useful to me than the whispers of survivors and the occasional glimpse of a tattoo on a maiden aunt's wrist.
Purists may feel that fiction dissipates the quest of real human understanding, that film is too crude to tell a complex and detailed history, or that filmmakers always serve drama over truth.
But within the reels lie purpose and meaning.
As one 12-year-old said after watching "Wizard of Oz," "Every person should watch this, because unless you do you may not know that you too have a heart."
We honor reading, why not honor watching with the same passion?
Consider "Citizen Kane" as valuable as Jane Austen.
Agree that "Boyz n the Hood," like Tennyson, offers an emotional landscape and a heightened understanding that work together.
Each a piece of memorable art, each a brick in the wall of who we are.
And it's okay if we remember Tom Hanks better than astronaut Jim Lovell or have Ben Kingsley's face superimposed onto that of Gandhi's.
And though not real, Eve Harrington, Howard Beale, Mildred Pierce are an opportunity to discover what it is to be human, and no less helpful to understanding our life and times as Shakespeare is in illuminating the world of Elizabethan England.
We guessed that film, whose stories are a meeting place of drama, music, literature and human experience, would engage and inspire the young people participating in FILMCLUB.
What we could not have foreseen was the measurable improvements in behavior, confidence and academic achievement.
Once-reluctant students now race to school, talk to their teachers, fight, not on the playground, but to choose next week's film -- young people who have found self-definition, ambition and an appetite for education and social engagement from the stories they have witnessed.
Our members defy the binary description of how we so often describe our young.
They are neither feral nor myopically self-absorbed.
They are, like other young people, negotiating a world with infinite choice, but little culture of how to find meaningful experience.
We appeared surprised at the behaviors of those who define themselves by the size of the tick on their shoes, yet acquisition has been the narrative we have offered.
If we want different values we have to tell a different story, a story that understands that an individual narrative is an essential component of a person's identity, that a collective narrative is an essential component of a cultural identity, and without it it is impossible to imagine yourself as part of a group.
Because when these people get home after a screening of "Rear Window" and raise their gaze to the building next door, they have the tools to wonder who, apart from them, is out there and what is their story.
Thank you.
It's a great time to be a molecular biologist.
Reading and writing DNA code is getting easier and cheaper.
By the end of this year, we'll be able to sequence the three million bits of information in your genome in less than a day and for less than 1,000 euros.
Biotech is probably the most powerful and the fastest-growing technology sector.
It has the power, potentially, to replace our fossil fuels, to revolutionize medicine, and to touch every aspect of our daily lives.
So who gets to do it?
I think we'd all be pretty comfortable with this guy doing it.
But what about that guy?
In 2009, I first heard about DIYbio.
It's a movement that -- it advocates making biotechnology accessible to everyone, not just scientists and people in government labs.
The idea is that if you open up the science and you allow diverse groups to participate, it could really stimulate innovation.
Putting technology in the hands of the end user is usually a good idea because they've got the best idea of what their needs are.
And here's this really sophisticated technology coming down the road, all these associated social, moral, ethical questions, and we scientists are just lousy at explaining to the public just exactly what it is we're doing in those labs.
So wouldn't it be nice if there was a place in your local neighborhood where you could go and learn about this stuff, do it hands-on?
I thought so.
So, three years ago, I got together with some friends of mine who had similar aspirations and we founded Genspace.
It's a nonprofit, a community biotech lab in Brooklyn, New York, and the idea was people could come, they could take classes and putter around in the lab in a very open, friendly atmosphere.
None of my previous experience prepared me for what came next. Can you guess?
The press started calling us.
And the more we talked about how great it was to increase science literacy, the more they wanted to talk about us creating the next Frankenstein, and as a result, for the next six months, when you Googled my name, instead of getting my scientific papers, you got this.
["Am I a biohazard?"] It was pretty depressing.
The only thing that got us through that period was that we knew that all over the world, there were other people that were trying to do the same thing that we were.
They were opening biohacker spaces, and some of them were facing much greater challenges than we did, more regulations, less resources.
But now, three years later, here's where we stand.
It's a vibrant, global community of hackerspaces, and this is just the beginning.
These are some of the biggest ones, and there are others opening every day.
There's one probably going to open up in Moscow, one in South Korea, and the cool thing is they each have their own individual flavor that grew out of the community they came out of.
Let me take you on a little tour.
Biohackers work alone.
We work in groups, in big cities   and in small villages.
We reverse engineer lab equipment.
We genetically engineer bacteria.
We hack hardware, software, wetware, and, of course, the code of life.
We like to build things.
Then we like to take things apart.
We make things grow.
We make things glow.
And we make cells dance.
The spirit of these labs, it's open, it's positive, but, you know, sometimes when people think of us, the first thing that comes to mind is bio-safety, bio-security, all the dark side stuff.
I'm not going to minimize those concerns.
Any powerful technology is inherently dual use, and, you know, you get something like synthetic biology, nanobiotechnology, it really compels you, you have to look at both the amateur groups but also the professional groups, because they have better infrastructure, they have better facilities, and they have access to pathogens.
So the United Nations did just that, and they recently issued a report on this whole area, and what they concluded was the power of this technology for positive was much greater than the risk for negative, and they even looked specifically at the DIYbio community, and they noted, not surprisingly, that the press had a tendency to consistently overestimate our capabilities and underestimate our ethics.
As a matter of fact, DIY people from all over the world, America, Europe, got together last year, and we hammered out a common code of ethics.
That's a lot more than conventional science has done.
Now, we follow state and local regulations.
We dispose of our waste properly, we follow safety procedures, we don't work with pathogens.
You know, if you're working with a pathogen, you're not part of the biohacker community, you're part of the bioterrorist community, I'm sorry.
And sometimes people ask me, "Well, what about an accident?"
Well, working with the safe organisms that we normally work with, the chance of an accident happening with somebody accidentally creating, like, some sort of superbug, that's literally about as probable as a snowstorm in the middle of the Sahara Desert.
Now, it could happen, but I'm not going to plan my life around it.
I've actually chosen to take a different kind of risk.
I signed up for something called the Personal Genome Project.
It's a study at Harvard where, at the end of the study, they're going to take my entire genomic sequence, all of my medical information, and my identity, and they're going to post it online for everyone to see.
There were a lot of risks involved that they talked about during the informed consent portion.
The one I liked the best is, someone could download my sequence, go back to the lab, synthesize some fake Ellen DNA, and plant it at a crime scene.
But like DIYbio, the positive outcomes and the potential for good for a study like that far outweighs the risk.
Now, you might be asking yourself, "Well, you know, what would I do in a biolab?"
Well, it wasn't that long ago we were asking, "Well, what would anyone do with a personal computer?"
So this stuff is just beginning.
We're only seeing just the tip of the DNA iceberg.
Let me show you what you could do right now.
A biohacker in Germany, a journalist, wanted to know whose dog was leaving little presents on his street?
Yep, you guessed it. He threw tennis balls to all the neighborhood dogs, analyzed the saliva, identified the dog, and confronted the dog owner.
I discovered an invasive species in my own backyard.
Looked like a ladybug, right?
It actually is a Japanese beetle.
And the same kind of technology -- it's called DNA barcoding, it's really cool -- You can use it to check if your caviar is really beluga, if that sushi is really tuna, or if that goat cheese that you paid so much for is really goat's.
In a biohacker space, you can analyze your genome for mutations.
You can analyze your breakfast cereal for GMO's, and you can explore your ancestry.
You can send weather balloons up into the stratosphere, collect microbes, see what's up there.
You can make a biocensor out of yeast to detect pollutants in water.
You can make some sort of a biofuel cell.
You can do a lot of things.
You can also do an art science project. Some of these are really spectacular, and they look at social, ecological problems from a completely different perspective.
It's really cool.
Some people ask me, well, why am I involved?
I could have a perfectly good career in mainstream science.
The thing is, there's something in these labs that they have to offer society that you can't find anywhere else.
There's something sacred about a space where you can work on a project, and you don't have to justify to anyone that it's going to make a lot of money, that it's going to save mankind, or even that it's feasible.
It just has to follow safety guidelines.
If you had spaces like this all over the world, it could really change the perception of who's allowed to do biotech.
It's spaces like these that spawned personal computing.
Why not personal biotech?
If everyone in this room got involved, who knows what we could do?
This is such a new area, and as we say back in Brooklyn, you ain't seen nothin' yet.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
That was whistling.
I'm trying to do this in English.
What is a chubby, curly-haired guy from Holland -- why is he whistling?
Well actually, I've [been] whistling since the age of four, about four.
My dad was always whistling around the house, and I just thought that's part of communication in my family.
So I whistled along with him.
And actually, till I was 34, I always annoyed and irritated people with whistling, because, to be honest, my whistling is a kind of deviant behavior.
I whistled alone. I whistled in the classroom.
I whistled on [my] bike. I whistled everywhere.
And I also whistled at a Christmas Eve party with my family-in-law.
And they had some, in my opinion, terrible Christmas music.
And when I hear music that I don't like, I try to make it better.
So "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer" -- you know it?
But it can also sound like this.
But during a Christmas party -- at dinner actually -- it's very annoying.
So my sister-in-law asked me a few times, "Please stop whistling."
And I just couldn't.
And at one point -- and I had some wine, I have to admit that -- at one point I said, "If there was a contest, I would join."
And two weeks later I received a text message: "You're going to America."
So, okay, I'm going to America.
I would love to, but why?
So I immediately called her up, of course.
She Googled, and she found this World Whistling Championship in America, of course.
She didn't expect me to go there.
And I would have lost my face.
I don't know if that's correct English.
But the Dutch people here will understand what I mean.
I lost my face.
And she thought, "He will never go there."
But actually I did.
So I went to Louisburg, North Carolina, southeast United States, and I entered the world of whistling.
And I also entered the world championship, and I won there in 2004.
That was great fun, of course.
And to defend my title -- like judokas do and sportsmen -- I thought, well let's go back in 2005, and I won again.
Then I couldn't participate for a few years.
And in 2008 I entered again in Japan, Tokyo, and I won again.
So what happened now is I'm standing here in Rotterdam, in the beautiful city, on a big stage, and I'm talking about whistling.
And actually I earn my money whistling at the moment.
So I quit my day job as a nurse.
And I try to live my dream -- well, actually, it was never my dream, but it sounds so good.
Okay, I'm not the only one whistling here.
You say, "Huh, what do you mean?"
Well actually, you are going to whistle along.
And then always the same thing happens: people are watching each other and think, "Oh, my God.
Why? Can I go away?"
No, you can't.
Actually it's very simple.
The track that I will whistle is called "Fte de la Belle."
It's about 80 minutes long.
No, no, no. It's four minutes long.
And I want to first rehearse with you your whistling.
So I whistle the tone.
Sorry. I forgot one thing.
You whistle the same tone as me.
I heard a wide variety of tones.
This is very promising.
This is very promising.
I'll ask the technicians to start the music.
And if it's started, I just point where you whistle along, and we will see what happens.
Oh, hah.
I'm so sorry, technicians.
I'm so used to that.
I start it myself.
Okay, here it is.
Okay.
It's easy, isn't it?
Now comes the solo. I propose I do that myself.
Max Westerman: Geert Chatrou, the World Champion [of] Whistling.
Geert Chatrou: Thank you. Thank you.
Francesca Fedeli: Ciao.
So he's Mario. He's our son.
He was born two and a half years ago, and I had a pretty tough pregnancy because I had to stay still in a bed for, like, eight months.
But in the end everything seemed to be under control.
So he got the right weight at birth.
He got the right Apgar index.
So we were pretty reassured by this.
But at the end, 10 days later after he was born, we discovered that he had a stroke.
As you might know, a stroke is a brain injury.
A perinatal stroke could be something that can happen during the nine months of pregnancy or just suddenly after the birth, and in his case, as you can see, the right part of his brain has gone.
So the effect that this stroke could have on Mario's body could be the fact that he couldn't be able to control the left side of his body.
Just imagine, if you have a computer and a printer and you want to transmit, to input to print out a document, but the printer doesn't have the right drives, so the same is for Mario.
It's just like, he would like to move his left side of his body, but he's not able to transmit the right input to move his left arm and left leg.
So life had to change.
We needed to change our schedule.
We needed to change the impact that this birth had on our life.
As you may imagine, unfortunately, we were not ready.
Nobody taught us how to deal with such kinds of disabilities, and as many questions as possible started to come to our minds.
And that has been really a tough time.
Questions, some basics, like, you know, why did this happen to us?
And what went wrong?
Some more tough, like, really, what will be the impact on Mario's life?
I mean, at the end, will he be able to work?
Will he be able to be normal?
And, you know, as a parent, especially for the first time, why is he not going to be better than us?
And this, indeed, really is tough to say, but a few months later, we realized that we were really feeling like a failure.
I mean, the only real product of our life, at the end, was a failure.
And you know, it was not a failure for ourselves in itself, but it was a failure that will impact his full life.
Honestly, we went down.
I mean we went really down, but at the end, we started to look at him, and we said, we have to react.
So immediately, as Francesca said, we changed our life.
We started physiotherapy, we started the rehabilitation, and one of the paths that we were following in terms of rehabilitation is the mirror neurons pilot.
Basically, we spent months doing this with Mario.
You have an object, and we showed him how to grab the object.
Now, the theory of mirror neurons simply says that in your brains, exactly now, as you watch me doing this, you are activating exactly the same neurons as if you do the actions.
