/ 




THE RIDDLE HOUSE 

The villagers of Little Hangleton still called it “the 
Riddle House,” even though it had been many years 
since the Riddle family had lived there. It stood on a 
hill overlooking the village, some of its windows 
boarded, tiles missing from its roof, and ivy spreading 
unchecked over its face. Once a fine-looking manor, 
and easily the largest and grandest building for miles 
around, the Riddle House was now damp, derelict, 
and unoccupied. 

The Little Hangletons all agreed that the old house 
was “creepy.” Half a century ago, something strange 
and horrible had happened there, something that the 
older inhabitants of the village still liked to discuss 
when topics for gossip were scarce. The story had 
been picked over so many times, and had been 
embroidered in so many places, that nobody was 
quite sure what the truth was anymore. Every version 
of the tale, however, started in the same place: Fifty 
years before, at daybreak on a fine summer’s 
morning, when the Riddle House had still been well 



Page | 2 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



kept and impressive, a maid had entered the drawing 
room to find all three Riddles dead. 

The maid had run screaming down the hill into the 
village and roused as many people as she could. 

“Lying there with their eyes wide open! Cold as ice! 
Still in their dinner things!” 

The police were summoned, and the whole of Little 
Hangleton had seethed with shocked curiosity and ill- 
disguised excitement. Nobody wasted their breath 
pretending to feel very sad about the Riddles, for they 
had been most unpopular. Elderly Mr. and Mrs. 
Riddle had been rich, snobbish, and rude, and their 
grown-up son, Tom, had been, if anything, worse. All 
the villagers cared about was the identity of their 
murderer — for plainly, three apparently healthy 
people did not all drop dead of natural causes on the 
same night. 

The Hanged Man, the village pub, did a roaring trade 
that night; the whole village seemed to have turned 
out to discuss the murders. They were rewarded for 
leaving their firesides when the Riddles’ cook arrived 
dramatically in their midst and announced to the 
suddenly silent pub that a man called Frank Bryce 
had just been arrested. 

“Frank!” cried several people. “Never!” 

Frank Bryce was the Riddles’ gardener. He lived alone 
in a rundown cottage on the grounds of the Riddle 
House. Frank had come back from the war with a 
very stiff leg and a great dislike of crowds and loud 
noises, and had been working for the Riddles ever 
since. 



Page | 3 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




There was a rush to buy the cook drinks and hear 
more details. 



“Always thought he was odd,” she told the eagerly 
listening villagers, after her fourth sherry. 

“Unfriendly, like. I’m sure if I’ve offered him a cuppa 
once, I’ve offered it a hundred times. Never wanted to 
mix, he didn’t.” 

“Ah, now,” said a woman at the bar, “he had a hard 
war, Frank. He likes the quiet life. That’s no reason to 



“Who else had a key to the back door, then?” barked 
the cook. “There’s been a spare key hanging in the 
gardener’s cottage far back as I can remember! 
Nobody forced the door last night! No broken 
windows! All Frank had to do was creep up to the big 
house while we was all sleeping. ...” 

The villagers exchanged dark looks. 

“I always thought he had a nasty look about him, 
right enough,” grunted a man at the bar. 

“War turned him funny, if you ask me,” said the 
landlord. 

“Told you I wouldn’t like to get on the wrong side of 
Frank, didn’t I, Dot?” said an excited woman in the 
corner. 

“Horrible temper,” said Dot, nodding fervently. “I 
remember, when he was a kid ...” 

By the following morning, hardly anyone in Little 
Hangleton doubted that Frank Bryce had killed the 
Riddles. 



Page | 4 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But over in the neighboring town of Great Hangleton, 
in the dark and dingy police station, Frank was 
stubbornly repeating, again and again, that he was 
innocent, and that the only person he had seen near 
the house on the day of the Riddles’ deaths had been 
a teenage boy, a stranger, dark-haired and pale. 
Nobody else in the village had seen any such boy, and 
the police were quite sure that Frank had invented 
him. 

Then, just when things were looking very serious for 
Frank, the report on the Riddles’ bodies came back 
and changed everything. 

The police had never read an odder report. A team of 
doctors had examined the bodies and had concluded 
that none of the Riddles had been poisoned, stabbed, 
shot, strangled, suffocated, or (as far as they could 
tell) harmed at all. In fact (the report continued, in a 
tone of unmistakable bewilderment), the Riddles all 
appeared to be in perfect health — apart from the fact 
that they were all dead. The doctors did note (as 
though determined to find something wrong with the 
bodies) that each of the Riddles had a look of terror 
upon his or her face — but as the frustrated police 
said, whoever heard of three people being frightened 
to death? 

As there was no proof that the Riddles had been 
murdered at all, the police were forced to let Frank go. 
The Riddles were buried in the Little Hangleton 
churchyard, and their graves remained objects of 
curiosity for a while. To everyone’s surprise, and amid 
a cloud of suspicion, Frank Bryce returned to his 
cottage on the grounds of the Riddle House. 

“ ’S far as I’m concerned, he killed them, and I don’t 
care what the police say,” said Dot in the Hanged 



Page | 5 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Man. “And if he had any decency, he’d leave here, 
knowing as how we knows he did it.” 

But Frank did not leave. He stayed to tend the garden 
for the next family who lived in the Riddle House, and 
then the next — for neither family stayed long. 

Perhaps it was partly because of Frank that the new 
owners said there was a nasty feeling about the place, 
which, in the absence of inhabitants, started to fall 
into disrepair. 

The wealthy man who owned the Riddle House these 
days neither lived there nor put it to any use; they 
said in the village that he kept it for “tax reasons,” 
though nobody was very clear what these might be. 
The wealthy owner continued to pay Frank to do the 
gardening, however. Frank was nearing his seventy- 
seventh birthday now, very deaf, his bad leg stiffer 
than ever, but could be seen pottering around the 
flower beds in fine weather, even though the weeds 
were starting to creep up on him, try as he might to 
suppress them. 

Weeds were not the only things Frank had to contend 
with either. Boys from the village made a habit of 
throwing stones through the windows of the Riddle 
House. They rode their bicycles over the lawns Frank 
worked so hard to keep smooth. Once or twice, they 
broke into the old house for a dare. They knew that 
old Frank’s devotion to the house and grounds 
amounted almost to an obsession, and it amused 
them to see him limping across the garden, 
brandishing his stick and yelling croakily at them. 
Frank, for his part, believed the boys tormented him 
because they, like their parents and grandparents, 
thought him a murderer. So when Frank awoke one 
night in August and saw something very odd up at 
the old house, he merely assumed that the boys had 
gone one step further in their attempts to punish him. 
Page | 6 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




It was Frank’s bad leg that woke him; it was paining 
him worse than ever in his old age. He got up and 
limped downstairs into the kitchen with the idea of 
refilling his hot-water bottle to ease the stiffness in 
his knee. Standing at the sink, filling the kettle, he 
looked up at the Riddle House and saw lights 
glimmering in its upper windows. Frank knew at once 
what was going on. The boys had broken into the 
house again, and judging by the flickering quality of 
the light, they had started a fire. 

Frank had no telephone, and in any case, he had 
deeply mistrusted the police ever since they had 
taken him in for questioning about the Riddles’ 
deaths. He put down the kettle at once, hurried back 
upstairs as fast as his bad leg would allow, and was 
soon back in his kitchen, fully dressed and removing 
a rusty old key from its hook by the door. He picked 
up his walking stick, which was propped against the 
wall, and set off into the night. 

The front door of the Riddle House bore no sign of 
being forced, nor did any of the windows. Frank 
limped around to the back of the house until he 
reached a door almost completely hidden by ivy, took 
out the old key, put it into the lock, and opened the 
door noiselessly. 

He let himself into the cavernous kitchen. Frank had 
not entered it for many years; nevertheless, although 
it was very dark, he remembered where the door into 
the hall was, and he groped his way toward it, his 
nostrils full of the smell of decay, ears pricked for any 
sound of footsteps or voices from overhead. He 
reached the hall, which was a little lighter owing to 
the large mullioned windows on either side of the 
front door, and started to climb the stairs, blessing 
the dust that lay thick upon the stone, because it 
muffled the sound of his feet and stick. 

Page | 7 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




On the landing, Frank turned right, and saw at once 
where the intruders were: At the very end of the 
passage a door stood ajar, and a flickering light shone 
through the gap, casting a long sliver of gold across 
the black floor. Frank edged closer and closer, 
grasping his walking stick firmly. Several feet from 
the entrance, he was able to see a narrow slice of the 
room beyond. 

The fire, he now saw, had been lit in the grate. This 
surprised him. Then he stopped moving and listened 
intently, for a man’s voice spoke within the room; it 
sounded timid and fearful. 

“There is a little more in the bottle, My Lord, if you 
are still hungry.” 

“Later,” said a second voice. This too belonged to a 
man — but it was strangely high-pitched, and cold as 
a sudden blast of icy wind. Something about that 
voice made the sparse hairs on the back of Frank’s 
neck stand up. “Move me closer to the fire, Wormtail.” 

Frank turned his right ear toward the door, the better 
to hear. There came the clink of a bottle being put 
down upon some hard surface, and then the dull 
scraping noise of a heavy chair being dragged across 
the floor. Frank caught a glimpse of a small man, his 
back to the door, pushing the chair into place. He was 
wearing a long black cloak, and there was a bald 
patch at the back of his head. Then he went out of 
sight again. 

“Where is Nagini?” said the cold voice. 

“I — I don’t know, My Lord,” said the first voice 
nervously. “She set out to explore the house, I think. 



Page | 8 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You will milk her before we retire, Wormtail,” said 
the second voice. “I will need feeding in the night. The 
journey has tired me greatly.” 

Brow furrowed, Frank inclined his good ear still closer 
to the door, listening very hard. There was a pause, 
and then the man called Wormtail spoke again. 

“My Lord, may I ask how long we are going to stay 
here?” 

“A week,” said the cold voice. “Perhaps longer. The 
place is moderately comfortable, and the plan cannot 
proceed yet. It would be foolish to act before the 
Quidditch World Cup is over.” 

Frank inserted a gnarled finger into his ear and 
rotated it. Owing, no doubt, to a buildup of earwax, 
he had heard the word “Quidditch,” which was not a 
word at all. 

“The — the Quidditch World Cup, My Lord?” said 
Wormtail. (Frank dug his finger still more vigorously 
into his ear.) “Forgive me, but — I do not understand 
— why should we wait until the World Cup is over?” 

“Because, fool, at this very moment wizards are 
pouring into the country from all over the world, and 
every meddler from the Ministry of Magic will be on 
duty, on the watch for signs of unusual activity, 
checking and double-checking identities. They will be 
obsessed with security, lest the Muggles notice 
anything. So we wait.” 

Frank stopped trying to clear out his ear. He had 
distinctly heard the words “Ministry of Magic,” 
“wizards,” and “Muggles.” Plainly, each of these 
expressions meant something secret, and Frank could 
think of only two sorts of people who would speak in 
Page | 9 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




code: spies and criminals. Frank tightened his hold 
on his walking stick once more, and listened more 
closely still. 

“Your Lordship is still determined, then?” Wormtail 
said quietly. 

“Certainly I am determined, Wormtail.” There was a 
note of menace in the cold voice now. 

A slight pause followed — and then Wormtail spoke, 
the words tumbling from him in a rush, as though he 
was forcing himself to say this before he lost his 
nerve. 

“It could be done without Harry Potter, My Lord.” 

Another pause, more protracted, and then — 

“Without Harry Potter?” breathed the second voice 
softly. “I see ...” 

“My Lord, I do not say this out of concern for the boy!” 
said Wormtail, his voice rising squeakily. “The boy is 
nothing to me, nothing at all! It is merely that if we 
were to use another witch or wizard — any wizard — 
the thing could be done so much more quickly! If you 
allowed me to leave you for a short while — you know 
that I can disguise myself most effectively — I could 
be back here in as little as two days with a suitable 
person — ” 

“I could use another wizard,” said the cold voice 
softly, “that is true. ...” 

“My Lord, it makes sense,” said Wormtail, sounding 
thoroughly relieved now. “Laying hands on Harry 
Potter would be so difficult, he is so well protected — ” 



Page | 10 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“And so you volunteer to go and fetch me a 
substitute? I wonder . . . perhaps the task of nursing 
me has become wearisome for you, “Wormtail? Could 
this suggestion of abandoning the plan be nothing 
more than an attempt to desert me?” 

“My Lord! I — I have no wish to leave you, none at all 



“Do not lie to me!” hissed the second voice. “I can 
always tell, Wormtail! You are regretting that you ever 
returned to me. I revolt you. I see you flinch when you 
look at me, feel you shudder when you touch me. ...” 

“No! My devotion to Your Lordship — ” 

“Your devotion is nothing more than cowardice. You 
would not be here if you had anywhere else to go. 

How am I to survive without you, when I need feeding 
every few hours? Who is to milk Nagini?” 

“But you seem so much stronger, My Lord — ” 

“Liar,” breathed the second voice. “I am no stronger, 
and a few days alone would be enough to rob me of 
the little health I have regained under your clumsy 
care. Silencel” 

Wormtail, who had been sputtering incoherently, fell 
silent at once. For a few seconds, Frank could hear 
nothing but the fire crackling. Then the second man 
spoke once more, in a whisper that was almost a hiss. 

“I have my reasons for using the boy, as I have 
already explained to you, and I will use no other. I 
have waited thirteen years. A few more months will 
make no difference. As for the protection surrounding 
the boy, I believe my plan will be effective. All that is 
needed is a little courage from you, Wormtail — 

Page | 11 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




courage you will find, unless you wish to feel the full 
extent of Lord Voldemort’s wrath — ” 

“My Lord, I must speak!” said Wormtail, panic in his 
voice now. “All through our journey I have gone over 
the plan in my head — My Lord, Bertha Jorkins’s 
disappearance will not go unnoticed for long, and if 
we proceed, if I murder — ” 

“IP” whispered the second voice. “If? If you follow the 
plan, Wormtail, the Ministry need never know that 
anyone else has died. You will do it quietly and 
without fuss; I only wish that I could do it myself, but 
in my present condition ... Come, Wormtail, one more 
death and our path to Harry Potter is clear. I am not 
asking you to do it alone. By that time, my faithful 
servant will have rejoined us — ” 

“I am a faithful servant,” said Wormtail, the merest 
trace of sullenness in his voice. 

“Wormtail, I need somebody with brains, somebody 
whose loyalty has never wavered, and you, 
unfortunately, fulfill neither requirement.” 

“I found you,” said Wormtail, and there was definitely 
a sulky edge to his voice now. “I was the one who 
found you. I brought you Bertha Jorkins.” 

“That is true,” said the second man, sounding 
amused. “A stroke of brilliance I would not have 
thought possible from you, Wormtail — though, if 
truth be told, you were not aware how useful she 
would be when you caught her, were you?” 

“I — I thought she might be useful, My Lord — ” 

“Liar,” said the second voice again, the cruel 
amusement more pronounced than ever. “However, I 

Page | 12 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




do not deny that her information was invaluable. 
Without it, I could never have formed our plan, and 
for that, you will have your reward, Wormtail. I will 
allow you to perform an essential task for me, one 
that many of my followers would give their right 
hands to perform. ...” 

“R-really, My Lord? What — ?” Wormtail sounded 
terrified again. 

“Ah, Wormtail, you don’t want me to spoil the 
surprise? Your part will come at the very end ... but I 
promise you, you will have the honor of being just as 
useful as Bertha Jorkins.” 

“You ... you ...” Wormtail’s voice suddenly sounded 
hoarse, as though his mouth had gone very dry. “You 
. . . are going ... to kill me too?” 

“Wormtail, Wormtail,” said the cold voice silkily, “why 
would I kill you? I killed Bertha because I had to. She 
was fit for nothing after my questioning, quite 
useless. In any case, awkward questions would have 
been asked if she had gone back to the Ministry with 
the news that she had met you on her holidays. 
Wizards who are supposed to be dead would do well 
not to run into Ministry of Magic witches at wayside 
inns. ...” 

Wormtail muttered something so quietly that Frank 
could not hear it, but it made the second man laugh 
— an entirely mirthless laugh, cold as his speech. 

“We could have modified her memory? But Memory 
Charms can be broken by a powerful wizard, as I 
proved when I questioned her. It would be an insult to 
her memory not to use the information I extracted 
from her, Wormtail.” 



Page | 13 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Out in the corridor, Frank suddenly became aware 
that the hand gripping his walking stick was slippery 
with sweat. The man with the cold voice had killed a 
woman. He was talking about it without any kind of 
remorse — with amusement. He was dangerous — a 
madman. And he was planning more murders — this 
boy, Harry Potter, whoever he was — was in danger — 

Frank knew what he must do. Now, if ever, was the 
time to go to the police. He would creep out of the 
house and head straight for the telephone box in the 
village . . . but the cold voice was speaking again, and 
Frank remained where he was, frozen to the spot, 
listening with all his might. 

“One more murder . . . my faithful servant at Hogwarts 
... Harry Potter is as good as mine, Wormtail. It is 
decided. There will be no more argument. But quiet ... 
I think I hear Nagini. ...” 

And the second man’s voice changed. He started 
making noises such as Frank had never heard before; 
he was hissing and spitting without drawing breath. 
Frank thought he must be having some sort of fit or 
seizure. 

And then Frank heard movement behind him in the 
dark passageway. He turned to look, and found 
himself paralyzed with fright. 

Something was slithering toward him along the dark 
corridor floor, and as it drew nearer to the sliver of 
firelight, he realized with a thrill of terror that it was a 
gigantic snake, at least twelve feet long. Horrified, 
transfixed, Frank stared as its undulating body cut a 
wide, curving track through the thick dust on the 
floor, coming closer and closer — What was he to do? 
The only means of escape was into the room where 



Page | 14 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




two men sat plotting murder, yet if he stayed where 
he was the snake would surely kill him — 

But before he had made his decision, the snake was 
level with him, and then, incredibly, miraculously, it 
was passing; it was following the spitting, hissing 
noises made by the cold voice beyond the door, and in 
seconds, the tip of its diamond-patterned tail had 
vanished through the gap. 

There was sweat on Frank’s forehead now, and the 
hand on the walking stick was trembling. Inside the 
room, the cold voice was continuing to hiss, and 
Frank was visited by a strange idea, an impossible 
idea. . . . This man could talk to snakes. 

Frank didn’t understand what was going on. He 
wanted more than anything to be back in his bed with 
his hot-water bottle. The problem was that his legs 
didn’t seem to want to move. As he stood there 
shaking and trying to master himself, the cold voice 
switched abruptly to English again. 

“Nagini has interesting news, Wormtail,” it said. 

“In-indeed, My Lord?” said Wormtail. 

“Indeed, yes,” said the voice. “According to Nagini, 
there is an old Muggle standing right outside this 
room, listening to every word we say.” 

Frank didn’t have a chance to hide himself. There 
were footsteps, and then the door of the room was 
flung wide open. 

A short, balding man with graying hair, a pointed 
nose, and small, watery eyes stood before Frank, a 
mixture of fear and alarm in his face. 



Page | 15 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Invite him inside, Wormtail. Where are your 
manners?” 

The cold voice was coming from the ancient armchair 
before the fire, but Frank couldn’t see the speaker. 
The snake, on the other hand, was curled up on the 
rotting hearth rug, like some horrible travesty of a pet 
dog. 

Wormtail beckoned Frank into the room. Though still 
deeply shaken, Frank took a firmer grip upon his 
walking stick and limped over the threshold. 

The fire was the only source of light in the room; it 
cast long, spidery shadows upon the walls. Frank 
stared at the back of the armchair; the man inside it 
seemed to be even smaller than his servant, for Frank 
couldn’t even see the back of his head. 

“You heard everything, Muggle?” said the cold voice. 

“What’s that you’re calling me?” said Frank defiantly, 
for now that he was inside the room, now that the 
time had come for some sort of action, he felt braver; 
it had always been so in the war. 

“I am calling you a Muggle,” said the voice coolly. “It 
means that you are not a wizard.” 

“I don’t know what you mean by wizard,” said Frank, 
his voice growing steadier. “All I know is I’ve heard 
enough to interest the police tonight, I have. You’ve 
done murder and you’re planning more! And I’ll tell 
you this too,” he added, on a sudden inspiration, “my 
wife knows I’m up here, and if I don’t come back — ” 

“You have no wife,” said the cold voice, very quietly. 
“Nobody knows you are here. You told nobody that 



Page | 16 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




you were coming. Do not lie to Lord Voldemort, 
Muggle, for he knows ... he always knows. ...” 

“Is that right?” said Frank roughly. “Lord, is it? Well, I 
don’t think much of your manners, My Lord. Turn 
’round and face me like a man, why don’t you?” 

“But I am not a man, Muggle,” said the cold voice, 
barely audible now over the crackling of the flames. “I 
am much, much more than a man. However ... why 
not? I will face you. ... Wormtail, come turn my chair 
around.” 

The servant gave a whimper. 

“You heard me, Wormtail.” 

Slowly, with his face screwed up, as though he would 
rather have done anything than approach his master 
and the hearth rug where the snake lay, the small 
man walked forward and began to turn the chair. The 
snake lifted its ugly triangular head and hissed 
slightly as the legs of the chair snagged on its rug. 

And then the chair was facing Frank, and he saw 
what was sitting in it. His walking stick fell to the 
floor with a clatter. He opened his mouth and let out 
a scream. He was screaming so loudly that he never 
heard the words the thing in the chair spoke as it 
raised a wand. There was a flash of green light, a 
rushing sound, and Frank Bryce crumpled. He was 
dead before he hit the floor. 

Two hundred miles away, the boy called Harry Potter 
woke with a start. 



Page | 17 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE SCAR 

Harry lay flat on his back, breathing hard as though 
he had been running. He had awoken from a vivid 
dream with his hands pressed over his face. The old 
scar on his forehead, which was shaped like a bolt of 
lightning, was burning beneath his fingers as though 
someone had just pressed a white-hot wire to his 
skin. 

He sat up, one hand still on his scar, the other 
reaching out in the darkness for his glasses, which 
were on the bedside table. He put them on and his 
bedroom came into clearer focus, lit by a faint, misty 
orange light that was filtering through the curtains 
from the street lamp outside the window. 

Harry ran his fingers over the scar again. It was still 
painful. He turned on the lamp beside him, scrambled 
out of bed, crossed the room, opened his wardrobe, 
and peered into the mirror on the inside of the door. A 
skinny boy of fourteen looked back at him, his bright 
green eyes puzzled under his untidy black hair. He 



Page | 18 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



examined the lightning-bolt scar of his reflection more 
closely. It looked normal, but it was still stinging. 

Harry tried to recall what he had been dreaming 
about before he had awoken. It had seemed so real. ... 
There had been two people he knew and one he 
didn’t. ... He concentrated hard, frowning, trying to 
remember. ... 

The dim picture of a darkened room came to him. ... 
There had been a snake on a hearth rug ... a small 
man called Peter, nicknamed Wormtail ... and a cold, 
high voice ... the voice of Lord Voldemort. Harry felt 
as though an ice cube had slipped down into his 
stomach at the very thought. ... 

He closed his eyes tightly and tried to remember what 
Voldemort had looked like, but it was impossible. ... 
All Harry knew was that at the moment when 
Voldemort’s chair had swung around, and he, Harry, 
had seen what was sitting in it, he had felt a spasm of 
horror, which had awoken him ... or had that been 
the pain in his scar? 

And who had the old man been? For there had 
definitely been an old man; Harry had watched him 
fall to the ground. It was all becoming confused. 

Harry put his face into his hands, blocking out his 
bedroom, trying to hold on to the picture of that dimly 
lit room, but it was like trying to keep water in his 
cupped hands; the details were now trickling away as 
fast as he tried to hold on to them. ... Voldemort and 
Wormtail had been talking about someone they had 
killed, though Harry could not remember the name . . . 
and they had been plotting to kill someone else . . . 
him). 

Harry took his face out of his hands, opened his eyes, 
and stared around his bedroom as though expecting 

Page | 19 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




to see something unusual there. As it happened, 
there were an extraordinary number of unusual 
things in this room. A large wooden trunk stood open 
at the foot of his bed, revealing a cauldron, 
broomstick, black robes, and assorted spellbooks. 
Rolls of parchment littered that part of his desk that 
was not taken up by the large, empty cage in which 
his snowy owl, Hedwig, usually perched. On the floor 
beside his bed a book lay open; Harry had been 
reading it before he fell asleep last night. The pictures 
in this book were all moving. Men in bright orange 
robes were zooming in and out of sight on 
broomsticks, throwing a red ball to one another. 

Harry walked over to the book, picked it up, and 
watched one of the wizards score a spectacular goal 
by putting the ball through a fifty-foot-high hoop. 

Then he snapped the book shut. Even Quidditch — in 
Harry’s opinion, the best sport in the world — 
couldn’t distract him at the moment. He placed Flying 
with the Cannons on his bedside table, crossed to the 
window, and drew back the curtains to survey the 
street below. 

Privet Drive looked exactly as a respectable suburban 
street would be expected to look in the early hours of 
Saturday morning. All the curtains were closed. As far 
as Harry could see through the darkness, there 
wasn’t a living creature in sight, not even a cat. 

And yet . . . and yet . . . Harry went restlessly back to 
the bed and sat down on it, running a finger over his 
scar again. It wasn’t the pain that bothered him; 

Harry was no stranger to pain and injury. He had lost 
all the bones from his right arm once and had them 
painfully regrown in a night. The same arm had been 
pierced by a venomous foot-long fang not long 
afterward. Only last year Harry had fallen fifty feet 
from an airborne broomstick. He was used to bizarre 
Page | 20 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




accidents and injuries; they were unavoidable if you 
attended Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry 
and had a knack for attracting a lot of trouble. 

No, the thing that was bothering Harry was that the 
last time his scar had hurt him, it had been because 
Voldemort had been close by. ... But Voldemort 
couldn’t be here, now. ... The idea of Voldemort 
lurking in Privet Drive was absurd, impossible. ... 

Harry listened closely to the silence around him. Was 
he half-expecting to hear the creak of a stair or the 
swish of a cloak? And then he jumped slightly as he 
heard his cousin Dudley give a tremendous grunting 
snore from the next room. 

Harry shook himself mentally; he was being stupid. 
There was no one in the house with him except Uncle 
Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and Dudley, and they were 
plainly still asleep, their dreams untroubled and 
painless. 

Asleep was the way Harry liked the Dursleys best; it 
wasn’t as though they were ever any help to him 
awake. Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and Dudley were 
Harry’s only living relatives. They were Muggles who 
hated and despised magic in any form, which meant 
that Harry was about as welcome in their house as 
dry rot. They had explained away Harry’s long 
absences at Hogwarts over the last three years by 
telling everyone that he went to St. Brutus’s Secure 
Center for Incurably Criminal Boys. They knew 
perfectly well that, as an underage wizard, Harry 
wasn’t allowed to use magic outside Hogwarts, but 
they were still apt to blame him for anything that 
went wrong about the house. Harry had never been 
able to confide in them or tell them anything about 
his life in the wizarding world. The very idea of going 
to them when they awoke, and telling them about his 
Page | 21 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




scar hurting him, and about his worries about 
Voldemort, was laughable. 

And yet it was because of Voldemort that Harry had 
come to live with the Dursleys in the first place. If it 
hadn’t been for Voldemort, Harry would not have had 
the lightning scar on his forehead. If it hadn’t been for 
Voldemort, Harry would still have had parents. ... 

Harry had been a year old the night that Voldemort — 
the most powerful Dark wizard for a century, a wizard 
who had been gaining power steadily for eleven years 
— arrived at his house and killed his father and 
mother. Voldemort had then turned his wand on 
Harry; he had performed the curse that had disposed 
of many full-grown witches and wizards in his steady 
rise to power — and, incredibly, it had not worked. 
Instead of killing the small boy, the curse had 
rebounded upon Voldemort. Harry had survived with 
nothing but a lightning-shaped cut on his forehead, 
and Voldemort had been reduced to something barely 
alive. His powers gone, his life almost extinguished, 
Voldemort had fled; the terror in which the secret 
community of witches and wizards had lived for so 
long had lifted, Voldemort’s followers had disbanded, 
and Harry Potter had become famous. 

It had been enough of a shock for Harry to discover, 
on his eleventh birthday, that he was a wizard; it had 
been even more disconcerting to find out that 
everyone in the hidden wizarding world knew his 
name. Harry had arrived at Hogwarts to find that 
heads turned and whispers followed him wherever he 
went. But he was used to it now: At the end of this 
summer, he would be starting his fourth year at 
Hogwarts, and Harry was already counting the days 
until he would be back at the castle again. 



Page | 22 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But there was still a fortnight to go before he went 
back to school. He looked hopelessly around his room 
again, and his eye paused on the birthday cards his 
two best friends had sent him at the end of July. 

What would they say if Harry wrote to them and told 
them about his scar hurting? 

At once, Hermione Granger’s voice seemed to fill his 
head, shrill and panicky. 

“ Your scar hurt? Harry, that’s really serious. . . . Write 
to Professor Dumbledorel And I’ll go and check 
Common Magical Ailments and Afflictions. ... Maybe 
there’s something in there about curse scars. ...” 

Yes, that would be Hermione’s advice: Go straight to 
the headmaster of Hogwarts, and in the meantime, 
consult a book. Harry stared out of the window at the 
inky blue-black sky. He doubted very much whether a 
book could help him now. As far as he knew, he was 
the only living person to have survived a curse like 
Voldemort’s; it was highly unlikely, therefore, that he 
would find his symptoms listed in Common Magical 
Ailments and Afflictions. As for informing the 
headmaster, Harry had no idea where Dumbledore 
went during the summer holidays. He amused himself 
for a moment, picturing Dumbledore, with his long 
silver beard, full-length wizard’s robes, and pointed 
hat, stretched out on a beach somewhere, rubbing 
suntan lotion onto his long crooked nose. Wherever 
Dumbledore was, though, Harry was sure that 
Hedwig would be able to find him; Harry’s owl had 
never yet failed to deliver a letter to anyone, even 
without an address. But what would he write? 

Dear Professor Dumbledore, Sorry to bother you, but 
my scar hurt this morning. Yours sincerely, Harry 
Potter. 



Page | 23 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Even inside his head the words sounded stupid. 

And so he tried to imagine his other best friend, Ron 
Weasley’s, reaction, and in a moment, Ron’s red hair 
and long-nosed, freckled face seemed to swim before 
Harry, wearing a bemused expression. 

“ Your scar hurt? But ... but You-Knotu-Who can’t be 
near you now, can he? I mean ... you’d know, wouldn’t 
you? He’d be trying to do you in again, wouldn’t he? I 
dunno, Harry, maybe curse scars always twinge a bit 
... I’ll ask Dad. ...” 

Mr. Weasley was a fully qualified wizard who worked 
in the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office at the 
Ministry of Magic, but he didn’t have any particular 
expertise in the matter of curses, as far as Harry 
knew. In any case, Harry didn’t like the idea of the 
whole Weasley family knowing that he, Harry, was 
getting jumpy about a few moments’ pain. Mrs. 
Weasley would fuss worse than Hermione, and Fred 
and George, Ron’s sixteen-year-old twin brothers, 
might think Harry was losing his nerve. The Weasleys 
were Harry’s favorite family in the world; he was 
hoping that they might invite him to stay any time 
now (Ron had mentioned something about the 
Quidditch World Cup), and he somehow didn’t want 
his visit punctuated with anxious inquiries about his 
scar. 

Harry kneaded his forehead with his knuckles. What 
he really wanted (and it felt almost shameful to admit 
it to himself) was someone like — someone like a 
parent: an adult wizard whose advice he could ask 
without feeling stupid, someone who cared about 
him, who had had experience with Dark Magic. ... 



Page | 24 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




And then the solution came to him. It was so simple, 
and so obvious, that he couldn’t believe it had taken 
so long — Sirius. 

Harry leapt up from the bed, hurried across the room, 
and sat down at his desk; he pulled a piece of 
parchment toward him, loaded his eagle-feather quill 
with ink, wrote Dear Sirius, then paused, wondering 
how best to phrase his problem, still marveling at the 
fact that he hadn’t thought of Sirius straight away. 

But then, perhaps it wasn’t so surprising — after all, 
he had only found out that Sirius was his godfather 
two months ago. 

There was a simple reason for Sirius’s complete 
absence from Harry’s life until then — Sirius had 
been in Azkaban, the terrifying wizard jail guarded by 
creatures called dementors, sightless, soul-sucking 
fiends who had come to search for Sirius at Hogwarts 
when he had escaped. Yet Sirius had been innocent 
— the murders for which he had been convicted had 
been committed by Wormtail, Voldemort’s supporter, 
whom nearly everybody now believed dead. Harry, 

Ron, and Hermione knew otherwise, however; they 
had come face-to-face with Wormtail only the 
previous year, though only Professor Dumbledore had 
believed their story. 

For one glorious hour, Harry had believed that he was 
leaving the Dursleys at last, because Sirius had 
offered him a home once his name had been cleared. 
But the chance had been snatched away from him — 
Wormtail had escaped before they could take him to 
the Ministry of Magic, and Sirius had had to flee for 
his life. Harry had helped him escape on the back of a 
hippogriff called Buckbeak, and since then, Sirius 
had been on the run. The home Harry might have had 
if Wormtail had not escaped had been haunting him 
all summer. It had been doubly hard to return to the 
Page | 25 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dursleys knowing that he had so nearly escaped them 
forever. 

Nevertheless, Sirius had been of some help to Harry, 
even if he couldn’t be with him. It was due to Sirius 
that Harry now had all his school things in his 
bedroom with him. The Dursleys had never allowed 
this before; their general wish of keeping Harry as 
miserable as possible, coupled with their fear of his 
powers, had led them to lock his school trunk in the 
cupboard under the stairs every summer prior to this. 
But their attitude had changed since they had found 
out that Harry had a dangerous murderer for a 
godfather — for Harry had conveniently forgotten to 
tell them that Sirius was innocent. 

Harry had received two letters from Sirius since he 
had been back at Privet Drive. Both had been 
delivered, not by owls (as was usual with wizards), 
but by large, brightly colored tropical birds. Hedwig 
had not approved of these flashy intruders; she had 
been most reluctant to allow them to drink from her 
water tray before flying off again. Harry, on the other 
hand, had liked them; they put him in mind of palm 
trees and white sand, and he hoped that, wherever 
Sirius was (Sirius never said, in case the letters were 
intercepted), he was enjoying himself. Somehow, 

Harry found it hard to imagine dementors surviving 
for long in bright sunlight; perhaps that was why 
Sirius had gone south. Sirius’s letters, which were 
now hidden beneath the highly useful loose 
floorboard under Harry’s bed, sounded cheerful, and 
in both of them he had reminded Harry to call on him 
if ever Harry needed to. Well, he needed to now, all 
right. ... 

Harry’s lamp seemed to grow dimmer as the cold gray 
light that precedes sunrise slowly crept into the room. 
Finally, when the sun had risen, when his bedroom 

Page | 26 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




walls had turned gold, and when sounds of movement 
could be heard from Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia’s 
room, Harry cleared his desk of crumpled pieces of 
parchment and reread his finished letter. 

Dear Sirius, 

Thanks for your last letter. That bird was enormous; it 
could hardly get through my window. 

Things are the same as usual here. Dudley’s diet isn’t 
going too well. My aunt found him smuggling 
doughnuts into his room yesterday. They told him 
they ’d have to cut his pocket money if he keeps doing 
it, so he got really angry and chucked his PlayStation 
out of the window. That’s a sort of computer thing you 
can play games on. Bit stupid really, now he hasn’t 
even got Mega-Mutilation Part Three to take his mind 
off things. 

I’m okay, mainly because the Dursleys are terrified 
you might turn up and turn them all into bats if I ask 
you to. 

A weird thing happened this morning, though. My scar 
hurt again. Last time that happened it was because 
Voldemort was at Hogwarts. But I don’t reckon he can 
be anywhere near me now, can he? Do you know if 
curse scars sometimes hurt years afterward? 

I’ll send this with Hedwig when she gets back; she’s 
offhunt-\ing at the moment. Say hello to Buckbeak for 
me. 

Harry 

Yes, thought Harry, that looked all right. There was 
no point putting in the dream; he didn’t want it to 
look as though he was too worried. He folded up the 

Page | 27 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




parchment and laid it aside on his desk, ready for 
when Hedwig returned. Then he got to his feet, 
stretched, and opened his wardrobe once more. 
Without glancing at his reflection, he started to get 
dressed before going down to breakfast. 



Page | 28 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




3 




THE INVITATION 

By the time Harry arrived in the kitchen, the three 
Dursleys were already seated around the table. None 
of them looked up as he entered or sat down. Uncle 
Vernon’s large red face was hidden behind the 
morning’s Daily Mail, and Aunt Petunia was cutting a 
grapefruit into quarters, her lips pursed over her 
horselike teeth. 

Dudley looked furious and sulky, and somehow 
seemed to be taking up even more space than usual. 
This was saying something, as he always took up an 
entire side of the square table by himself. When Aunt 
Petunia put a quarter of unsweetened grapefruit onto 
Dudley’s plate with a tremulous “There you are, Diddy 
darling,” Dudley glowered at her. His life had taken a 
most unpleasant turn since he had come home for 
the summer with his end-of-year report. 

Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia had managed to find 
excuses for his bad marks as usual: Aunt Petunia 
always insisted that Dudley was a very gifted boy 
whose teachers didn’t understand him, while Uncle 

Page | 29 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



Vernon maintained that “he didn’t want some swotty 
little nancy boy for a son anyway.” They also skated 
over the accusations of bullying in the report — “He’s 
a boisterous little boy, but he wouldn’t hurt a fly!” 
Aunt Petunia had said tearfully. 

However, at the bottom of the report there were a few 
well-chosen comments from the school nurse that not 
even Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia could explain 
away. No matter how much Aunt Petunia wailed that 
Dudley was big-boned, and that his poundage was 
really puppy fat, and that he was a growing boy who 
needed plenty of food, the fact remained that the 
school outfitters didn’t stock knickerbockers big 
enough for him anymore. The school nurse had seen 
what Aunt Petunia’s eyes — so sharp when it came to 
spotting fingerprints on her gleaming walls, and in 
observing the comings and goings of the neighbors — 
simply refused to see: that far from needing extra 
nourishment, Dudley had reached roughly the size 
and weight of a young killer whale. 

So — after many tantrums, after arguments that 
shook Harry’s bedroom floor, and many tears from 
Aunt Petunia — the new regime had begun. The diet 
sheet that had been sent by the Smeltings school 
nurse had been taped to the fridge, which had been 
emptied of all Dudley’s favorite things — fizzy drinks 
and cakes, chocolate bars and burgers — and filled 
instead with fruit and vegetables and the sorts of 
things that Uncle Vernon called “rabbit food.” To 
make Dudley feel better about it all, Aunt Petunia had 
insisted that the whole family follow the diet too. She 
now passed a grapefruit quarter to Harry. He noticed 
that it was a lot smaller than Dudley’s. Aunt Petunia 
seemed to feel that the best way to keep up Dudley’s 
morale was to make sure that he did, at least, get 
more to eat than Harry. 



Page | 30 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But Aunt Petunia didn’t know what was hidden under 
the loose floorboard upstairs. She had no idea that 
Harry was not following the diet at all. The moment 
he had got wind of the fact that he was expected to 
survive the summer on carrot sticks, Harry had sent 
Hedwig to his friends with pleas for help, and they 
had risen to the occasion magnificently. Hedwig had 
returned from Hermione’s house with a large box 
stuffed full of sugar-free snacks. (Hermione’s parents 
were dentists.) Hagrid, the Hogwarts gamekeeper, had 
obliged with a sack full of his own homemade rock 
cakes. (Harry hadn’t touched these; he had had too 
much experience of Hagrid ’s cooking.) Mrs. Weasley, 
however, had sent the family owl, Errol, with an 
enormous fruitcake and assorted meat pies. Poor 
Errol, who was elderly and feeble, had needed a full 
five days to recover from the journey. And then on 
Harry’s birthday (which the Dursleys had completely 
ignored) he had received four superb birthday cakes, 
one each from Ron, Hermione, Hagrid, and Sirius. 
Harry still had two of them left, and so, looking 
forward to a real breakfast when he got back upstairs, 
he ate his grapefruit without complaint. 

Uncle Vernon laid aside his paper with a deep sniff of 
disapproval and looked down at his own grapefruit 
quarter. 

“Is this it?” he said grumpily to Aunt Petunia. 

Aunt Petunia gave him a severe look, and then 
nodded pointedly at Dudley, who had already finished 
his own grapefruit quarter and was eyeing Harry’s 
with a very sour look in his piggy little eyes. 

Uncle Vernon gave a great sigh, which ruffled his 
large, bushy mustache, and picked up his spoon. 



Page | 31 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The doorbell rang. Uncle Vernon heaved himself out 
of his chair and set off down the hall. Quick as a 
flash, while his mother was occupied with the kettle, 
Dudley stole the rest of Uncle Vernon’s grapefruit. 

Harry heard talking at the door, and someone 
laughing, and Uncle Vernon answering curtly. Then 
the front door closed, and the sound of ripping paper 
came from the hall. 

Aunt Petunia set the teapot down on the table and 
looked curiously around to see where Uncle Vernon 
had got to. She didn’t have to wait long to find out; 
after about a minute, he was back. He looked livid. 

“You,” he barked at Harry. “In the living room. Now.” 

Bewildered, wondering what on earth he was 
supposed to have done this time, Harry got up and 
followed Uncle Vernon out of the kitchen and into the 
next room. Uncle Vernon closed the door sharply 
behind both of them. 

“So,” he said, marching over to the fireplace and 
turning to face Harry as though he were about to 
pronounce him under arrest. “So.” 

Harry would have dearly loved to have said, “So 
what?” but he didn’t feel that Uncle Vernon’s temper 
should be tested this early in the morning, especially 
when it was already under severe strain from lack of 
food. He therefore settled for looking politely puzzled. 

“This just arrived,” said Uncle Vernon. He brandished 
a piece of purple writing paper at Harry. “A letter. 
About you.” 



Page | 32 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry’s confusion increased. Who would be writing to 
Uncle Vernon about him? Who did he know who sent 
letters by the postman? 

Uncle Vernon glared at Harry, then looked down at 
the letter and began to read aloud: 

Dear Mr. and Mrs. Dursley, 

We have never been introduced, but I am sure you 
have heard a great deal from Harry about my son Ron. 

As Harry might have told you, the final of the 
Quidditch World Cup takes place this Monday night, 
and my husband, Arthur, has just managed to get 
prime tickets through his connections at the 
Department of Magical Games and Sports. 

I do hope you will allow us to take Harry to the match, 
as this really is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity; Britain 
hasn’t hosted the cup for thirty years, and tickets are 
extremely hard to come by. We would of course be glad 
to have Harry stay for the remainder of the summer 
holidays, and to see him safely onto the train back to 
school. 

It would be best for Harry to send us your answer as 
quickly as possible in the normal way, because the 
Muggle postman has never delivered to our house, and 
I am not sure he even knows where it is. 

Hoping to see Harry soon, 

Yours sincerely, 

Molly Weasley 

P.S. I do hope we’ve put enough stamps on. 



Page | 33 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Uncle Vernon finished reading, put his hand back 
into his breast pocket, and drew out something else. 

“Look at this,” he growled. 

He held up the envelope in which Mrs. Weasley’s 
letter had come, and Harry had to fight down a laugh. 
Every bit of it was covered in stamps except for a 
square inch on the front, into which Mrs. Weasley 
had squeezed the Dursleys’ address in minute 
writing. 

“She did put enough stamps on, then,” said Harry, 
trying to sound as though Mrs. Weasley’s was a 
mistake anyone could make. His uncle’s eyes flashed. 

“The postman noticed,” he said through gritted teeth. 
“Very interested to know where this letter came from, 
he was. That’s why he rang the doorbell. Seemed to 
think it was funny.” 

Harry didn’t say anything. Other people might not 
understand why Uncle Vernon was making a fuss 
about too many stamps, but Harry had lived with the 
Dursleys too long not to know how touchy they were 
about anything even slightly out of the ordinary. Their 
worst fear was that someone would find out that they 
were connected (however distantly) with people like 
Mrs. Weasley. 

Uncle Vernon was still glaring at Harry, who tried to 
keep his expression neutral. If he didn’t do or say 
anything stupid, he might just be in for the treat of a 
lifetime. He waited for Uncle Vernon to say 
something, but he merely continued to glare. Harry 
decided to break the silence. 

“So — can I go then?” he asked. 



Page | 34 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




A slight spasm crossed Uncle Vernon’s large purple 
face. The mustache bristled. Harry thought he knew 
what was going on behind the mustache: a furious 
battle as two of Uncle Vernon’s most fundamental 
instincts came into conflict. Allowing Harry to go 
would make Harry happy, something Uncle Vernon 
had struggled against for thirteen years. On the other 
hand, allowing Harry to disappear to the Weasleys’ for 
the rest of the summer would get rid of him two 
weeks earlier than anyone could have hoped, and 
Uncle Vernon hated having Harry in the house. To 
give himself thinking time, it seemed, he looked down 
at Mrs. Weasley’s letter again. 

“Who is this woman?” he said, staring at the 
signature with distaste. 

“You’ve seen her,” said Harry. “She’s my friend Ron’s 
mother, she was meeting him off the Hog — off the 
school train at the end of last term.” 

He had almost said “Hogwarts Express,” and that was 
a sure way to get his uncle’s temper up. Nobody ever 
mentioned the name of Harry’s school aloud in the 
Dursley household. 

Uncle Vernon screwed up his enormous face as 
though trying to remember something very 
unpleasant. 

“Dumpy sort of woman?” he growled finally. “Load of 
children with red hair?” 

Harry frowned. He thought it was a bit rich of Uncle 
Vernon to call anyone “dumpy,” when his own son, 
Dudley, had finally achieved what he’d been 
threatening to do since the age of three, and become 
wider than he was tall. 



Page | 35 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Uncle Vernon was perusing the letter again. 

“Quidditch,” he muttered under his breath. 

“Quidditch — what is this rubbish?” 

Harry felt a second stab of annoyance. 

“It’s a sport,” he said shortly. “Played on broom — ” 

“All right, all right!” said Uncle Vernon loudly. Harry 
saw, with some satisfaction, that his uncle looked 
vaguely panicky. Apparently his nerves couldn’t stand 
the sound of the word “broomsticks” in his living 
room. He took refuge in perusing the letter again. 
Harry saw his lips form the words “send us your 
answer ... in the normal way.” He scowled. 

“What does she mean, ‘the normal way’?” he spat. 

“Normal for us,” said Harry, and before his uncle 
could stop him, he added, “you know, owl post. That’s 
what’s normal for wizards.” 

Uncle Vernon looked as outraged as if Harry had just 
uttered a disgusting swear word. Shaking with anger, 
he shot a nervous look through the window, as 
though expecting to see some of the neighbors with 
their ears pressed against the glass. 

“How many times do I have to tell you not to mention 
that unnaturalness under my roof?” he hissed, his 
face now a rich plum color. “You stand there, in the 
clothes Petunia and I have put on your ungrateful 
back — ” 

“Only after Dudley finished with them,” said Harry 
coldly, and indeed, he was dressed in a sweatshirt so 
large for him that he had had to roll back the sleeves 



Page | 36 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




five times so as to be able to use his hands, and 
which fell past the knees of his extremely baggy jeans. 



“I will not be spoken to like that!” said Uncle Vernon, 
trembling with rage. 

But Harry wasn’t going to stand for this. Gone were 
the days when he had been forced to take every single 
one of the Dursleys’ stupid rules. He wasn’t following 
Dudley’s diet, and he wasn’t going to let Uncle Vernon 
stop him from going to the Quidditch World Cup, not 
if he could help it. Harry took a deep, steadying 
breath and then said, “Okay, I can’t see the World 
Cup. Can I go now, then? Only I’ve got a letter to 
Sirius I want to finish. You know — my godfather.” 

He had done it. He had said the magic words. Now he 
watched the purple recede blotchily from Uncle 
Vernon’s face, making it look like badly mixed black 
currant ice cream. 

“You’re — you’re writing to him, are you?” said Uncle 
Vernon, in a would-be calm voice — but Harry had 
seen the pupils of his tiny eyes contract with sudden 
fear. 

“Well — yeah,” said Harry, casually. “It’s been a while 
since he heard from me, and, you know, if he doesn’t, 
he might start thinking something’s wrong.” 

He stopped there to enjoy the effect of these words. 

He could almost see the cogs working under Uncle 
Vernon’s thick, dark, neatly parted hair. If he tried to 
stop Harry writing to Sirius, Sirius would think Harry 
was being mistreated. If he told Harry he couldn’t go 
to the Quidditch World Cup, Harry would write and 
tell Sirius, who would know Harry was being 
mistreated. There was only one thing for Uncle 
Vernon to do. Harry could see the conclusion forming 
Page | 37 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




in his uncle’s mind as though the great mustached 
face were transparent. Harry tried not to smile, to 
keep his own face as blank as possible. And then — 

“Well, all right then. You can go to this ruddy ... this 
stupid ... this World Cup thing. You write and tell 
these — these Weasleys they’re to pick you up, mind. 
I haven’t got time to go dropping you off all over the 
country. And you can spend the rest of the summer 
there. And you can tell your — your godfather ... tell 
him ... tell him you’re going.” 

“Okay then,” said Harry brightly. 

He turned and walked toward the living room door, 
fighting the urge to jump into the air and whoop. He 
was going ... he was going to the Weasleys’, he was 
going to watch the Quidditch World Cup! 

Outside in the hall he nearly ran into Dudley, who 
had been lurking behind the door, clearly hoping to 
overhear Harry being told off. He looked shocked to 
see the broad grin on Harry’s face. 

“That was an excellent breakfast, wasn’t it?” said 
Harry. “I feel really full, don’t you?” 

Laughing at the astonished look on Dudley’s face, 
Harry took the stairs three at a time, and hurled 
himself back into his bedroom. 

The first thing he saw was that Hedwig was back. She 
was sitting in her cage, staring at Harry with her 
enormous amber eyes, and clicking her beak in the 
way that meant she was annoyed about something. 
Exactly what was annoying her became apparent 
almost at once. 



Page | 38 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“OUCH!” said Harry as what appeared to be a small, 
gray, feathery tennis ball collided with the side of his 
head. Harry massaged the spot furiously, looking up 
to see what had hit him, and saw a minute owl, small 
enough to fit into the palm of his hand, whizzing 
excitedly around the room like a loose firework. Harry 
then realized that the owl had dropped a letter at his 
feet. Harry bent down, recognized Ron’s handwriting, 
then tore open the envelope. Inside was a hastily 
scribbled note. 

Harry — DAD GOT THE TICKETS — Ireland versus 
Bulgaria, Monday night. Mum’s writing to the Muggles 
to ask you to stay. They might already have the letter, 

I don’t know how fast Muggle post is. Thought I’d send 
this with Pig anyway. 

Harry stared at the word “Pig,” then looked up at the 
tiny owl now zooming around the light fixture on the 
ceiling. He had never seen anything that looked less 
like a pig. Maybe he couldn’t read Ron’s writing. He 
went back to the letter: 

We’re coming for you whether the Muggles like it or 
not, you can’t miss the World Cup, only Mum and Dad 
reckon it’s better if we pretend to ask their permission 
first. If they say yes, send Pig back with your answer 
pronto, and we’ll come and get you at five o’clock on 
Sunday. If they say no, send Pig back pronto and we’ll 
come and get you at five o’clock on Sunday anyway. 

Hermione’s arriving this afternoon. Percy’s started 
work — the Department of International Magical 
Cooperation. Don’t mention anything about Abroad 
while you’re here unless you want the pants bored off 
you. 

See you soon — 



Page | 39 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Ron 



“Calm down!” Harry said as the small owl flew low 
over his head, twittering madly with what Harry could 
only assume was pride at having delivered the letter 
to the right person. “Come here, I need you to take my 
answer back!” 

The owl fluttered down on top of Hedwig’s cage. 
Hedwig looked coldly up at it, as though daring it to 
try and come any closer. 

Harry seized his eagle-feather quill once more, 
grabbed a fresh piece of parchment, and wrote: 

Ron, it’s all okay, the Muggles say I can come. See you 
five o’clock tomorrow. Can’t wait. 

Harry 

He folded this note up very small, and with immense 
difficulty, tied it to the tiny owl’s leg as it hopped on 
the spot with excitement. The moment the note was 
secure, the owl was off again; it zoomed out of the 
window and out of sight. 

Harry turned to Hedwig. 

“Feeling up to a long journey?” he asked her. 

Hedwig hooted in a dignified sort of a way. 

“Can you take this to Sirius for me?” he said, picking 
up his letter. “Hang on ... I just want to finish it.” 

He unfolded the parchment and hastily added a 
postscript. 



Page | 40 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




If you want to contact me, I’ll be at my friend Ron 
Weasley’s for the rest of the summer. His dad’s got us 
tickets for the Quidditch World Cup\ 

The letter finished, he tied it to Hedwig’s leg; she kept 
unusually still, as though determined to show him 
how a real post owl should behave. 

“I’ll be at Ron’s when you get back, all right?” Harry 
told her. 

She nipped his finger affectionately, then, with a soft 
swooshing noise, spread her enormous wings and 
soared out of the open window. 

Harry watched her out of sight, then crawled under 
his bed, wrenched up the loose floorboard, and pulled 
out a large chunk of birthday cake. He sat there on 
the floor eating it, savoring the happiness that was 
flooding through him. He had cake, and Dudley had 
nothing but grapefruit; it was a bright summer’s day, 
he would be leaving Privet Drive tomorrow, his scar 
felt perfectly normal again, and he was going to watch 
the Quidditch World Cup. It was hard, just now, to 
feel worried about anything — even Lord Voldemort. 



Page | 41 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






BACK TO THE BURROW 

By twelve o’clock the next day, Harry’s school trunk 
was packed with his school things and all his most 
prized possessions — the Invisibility Cloak he had 
inherited from his father, the broomstick he had 
gotten from Sirius, the enchanted map of Hogwarts he 
had been given by Fred and George Weasley last year. 
He had emptied his hiding place under the loose 
floorboard of all food, double-checked every nook and 
cranny of his bedroom for forgotten spellbooks or 
quills, and taken down the chart on the wall counting 
down the days to September the first, on which he 
liked to cross off the days remaining until his return 
to Hogwarts. 

The atmosphere inside number four, Privet Drive was 
extremely tense. The imminent arrival at their house 
of an assortment of wizards was making the Dursleys 
uptight and irritable. Uncle Vernon had looked 
downright alarmed when Harry informed him that the 
Weasley s would be arriving at five o’clock the very 
next day. 



Page | 42 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“I hope you told them to dress properly, these people,” 
he snarled at once. “I’ve seen the sort of stuff your lot 
wear. They’d better have the decency to put on 
normal clothes, that’s all.” 

Harry felt a slight sense of foreboding. He had rarely 
seen Mr. or Mrs. Weasley wearing anything that the 
Dursleys would call “normal.” Their children might 
don Muggle clothing during the holidays, but Mr. and 
Mrs. Weasley usually wore long robes in varying 
states of shabbiness. Harry wasn’t bothered about 
what the neighbors would think, but he was anxious 
about how rude the Dursleys might be to the 
Weasleys if they turned up looking like their worst 
idea of wizards. 

Uncle Vernon had put on his best suit. To some 
people, this might have looked like a gesture of 
welcome, but Harry knew it was because Uncle 
Vernon wanted to look impressive and intimidating. 
Dudley, on the other hand, looked somehow 
diminished. This was not because the diet was at last 
taking effect, but due to fright. Dudley had emerged 
from his last encounter with a fully-grown wizard with 
a curly pig’s tail poking out of the seat of his trousers, 
and Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon had had to pay 
for its removal at a private hospital in London. It 
wasn’t altogether surprising, therefore, that Dudley 
kept running his hand nervously over his backside, 
and walking sideways from room to room, so as not to 
present the same target to the enemy. 

Lunch was an almost silent meal. Dudley didn’t even 
protest at the food (cottage cheese and grated celery). 
Aunt Petunia wasn’t eating anything at all. Her arms 
were folded, her lips were pursed, and she seemed to 
be chewing her tongue, as though biting back the 
furious diatribe she longed to throw at Harry. 



Page | 43 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“They’ll be driving, of course?” Uncle Vernon barked 
across the table. 

“Er,” said Harry. 

He hadn’t thought of that. How were the Weasleys 
going to pick him up? They didn’t have a car 
anymore; the old Ford Anglia they had once owned 
was currently running wild in the Forbidden Forest at 
Hogwarts. But Mr. Weasley had borrowed a Ministry 
of Magic car last year; possibly he would do the same 
today? 

“I think so,” said Harry. 

Uncle Vernon snorted into his mustache. Normally, 
Uncle Vernon would have asked what car Mr. Weasley 
drove; he tended to judge other men by how big and 
expensive their cars were. But Harry doubted whether 
Uncle Vernon would have taken to Mr. Weasley even 
if he drove a Ferrari. 

Harry spent most of the afternoon in his bedroom; he 
couldn’t stand watching Aunt Petunia peer out 
through the net curtains every few seconds, as 
though there had been a warning about an escaped 
rhinoceros. Finally, at a quarter to five, Harry went 
back downstairs and into the living room. 

Aunt Petunia was compulsively straightening 
cushions. Uncle Vernon was pretending to read the 
paper, but his tiny eyes were not moving, and Harry 
was sure he was really listening with all his might for 
the sound of an approaching car. Dudley was 
crammed into an armchair, his porky hands beneath 
him, clamped firmly around his bottom. Harry 
couldn’t take the tension; he left the room and went 
and sat on the stairs in the hall, his eyes on his 



Page | 44 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




watch and his heart pumping fast from excitement 
and nerves. 

But five o’clock came and then went. Uncle Vernon, 
perspiring slightly in his suit, opened the front door, 
peered up and down the street, then withdrew his 
head quickly. 

“They’re late!” he snarled at Harry. 

“I know,” said Harry. “Maybe — er — the traffic’s bad, 
or something.” 

Ten past five ... then a quarter past five ... Harry was 
starting to feel anxious himself now. At half past, he 
heard Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia conversing in 
terse mutters in the living room. 

“No consideration at all.” 

“We might’ve had an engagement.” 

“Maybe they think theyll get invited to dinner if 
they’re late.” 

“Well, they most certainly won’t be,” said Uncle 
Vernon, and Harry heard him stand up and start 
pacing the living room. “They’ll take the boy and go, 
there 11 be no hanging around. That’s if they’re coming 
at all. Probably mistaken the day. I daresay their kind 
don’t set much store by punctuality. Either that or 
they drive some tin-pot car that’s broken d — 
AAAAAAAARRRRRGH ! ” 

Harry jumped up. From the other side of the living 
room door came the sounds of the three Dursleys 
scrambling, panic-stricken, across the room. Next 
moment Dudley came flying into the hall, looking 
terrified. 

Page | 45 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What happened?” said Harry. “What’s the matter?” 

But Dudley didn’t seem able to speak. Hands still 
clamped over his buttocks, he waddled as fast as he 
could into the kitchen. Harry hurried into the living 
room. 

Loud hangings and scrapings were coming from 
behind the Dursleys’ boarded-up fireplace, which had 
a fake coal fire plugged in front of it. 

“What is it?” gasped Aunt Petunia, who had backed 
into the wall and was staring, terrified, toward the 
fire. “What is it, Vernon?” 

But they were left in doubt barely a second longer. 
Voices could be heard from inside the blocked 
fireplace. 

“Ouch! Fred, no — go back, go back, there’s been 
some kind of mistake — tell George not to — OUCH! 
George, no, there’s no room, go back quickly and tell 
Ron — ” 

“Maybe Harry can hear us, Dad — maybe he’ll be able 
to let us out — ” 

There was a loud hammering of fists on the boards 
behind the electric fire. 

“Harry? Harry, can you hear us?” 

The Dursleys rounded on Harry like a pair of angry 
wolverines. 

“What is this?” growled Uncle Vernon. “What’s going 
on?” 



Page | 46 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“They — they’ve tried to get here by Floo powder,” 
said Harry, fighting a mad desire to laugh. “They can 
travel by fire — only you’ve blocked the fireplace — 
hang on — ” 

He approached the fireplace and called through the 
boards. 

“Mr. Weasley? Can you hear me?” 

The hammering stopped. Somebody inside the 
chimney piece said, “Shh!” 

“Mr. Weasley, it’s Harry ... the fireplace has been 
blocked up. You won’t be able to get through there.” 

“Damn!” said Mr. Weasley’s voice. “What on earth did 
they want to block up the fireplace for?” 

“They’ve got an electric fire,” Harry explained. 

“Really?” said Mr. Weasley’s voice excitedly. “Eclectic, 
you say? With a plug? Gracious, I must see that. ... 
Let’s think ... ouch, Ron!” 

Ron’s voice now joined the others’. 

“What are we doing here? Has something gone 
wrong?” 

“Oh no, Ron,” came Fred’s voice, very sarcastically. 
“No, this is exactly where we wanted to end up.” 

“Yeah, we’re having the time of our lives here,” said 
George, whose voice sounded muffled, as though he 
was squashed against the wall. 



Page | 47 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Boys, boys ...” said Mr. Weasley vaguely. “I’m trying 
to think what to do. ... Yes ... only way ... Stand back, 
Harry.” 

Harry retreated to the sofa. Uncle Vernon, however, 
moved forward. 

“Wait a moment!” he bellowed at the fire. “What 
exactly are you going to — ” 

BANG. 

The electric fire shot across the room as the boarded- 
up fireplace burst outward, expelling Mr. Weasley, 
Fred, George, and Ron in a cloud of rubble and loose 
chippings. Aunt Petunia shrieked and fell backward 
over the coffee table; Uncle Vernon caught her before 
she hit the floor, and gaped, speechless, at the 
Weasleys, all of whom had bright red hair, including 
Fred and George, who were identical to the last 
freckle. 

“That’s better,” panted Mr. Weasley, brushing dust 
from his long green robes and straightening his 
glasses. “Ah — you must be Harry’s aunt and uncle!” 

Tall, thin, and balding, he moved toward Uncle 
Vernon, his hand outstretched, but Uncle Vernon 
backed away several paces, dragging Aunt Petunia. 
Words utterly failed Uncle Vernon. His best suit was 
covered in white dust, which had settled in his hair 
and mustache and made him look as though he had 
just aged thirty years. 

“Er — yes — sorry about that,” said Mr. Weasley, 
lowering his hand and looking over his shoulder at 
the blasted fireplace. “It’s all my fault. It just didn’t 
occur to me that we wouldn’t be able to get out at the 
other end. I had your fireplace connected to the Floo 
Page | 48 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Network, you see — just for an afternoon, you know, 
so we could get Harry. Muggle fireplaces aren’t 
supposed to be connected, strictly speaking — but 
I’ve got a useful contact at the Floo Regulation Panel 
and he fixed it for me. I can put it right in a jiffy, 
though, don’t worry. I’ll light a fire to send the boys 
back, and then I can repair your fireplace before I 
Disapparate.” 

Harry was ready to bet that the Dursleys hadn’t 
understood a single word of this. They were still 
gaping at Mr. Weasley, thunderstruck. Aunt Petunia 
staggered upright again and hid behind Uncle 
Vernon. 

“Hello, Harry!” said Mr. Weasley brightly. “Got your 
trunk ready?” 

“It’s upstairs,” said Harry, grinning back. 

“Well get it,” said Fred at once. Winking at Harry, he 
and George left the room. They knew where Harry’s 
bedroom was, having once rescued him from it in the 
dead of night. Harry suspected that Fred and George 
were hoping for a glimpse of Dudley; they had heard a 
lot about him from Harry. 

“Well,” said Mr. Weasley, swinging his arms slightly, 
while he tried to find words to break the very nasty 
silence. “Very — erm — very nice place you’ve got 
here.” 

As the usually spotless living room was now covered 
in dust and bits of brick, this remark didn’t go down 
too well with the Dursleys. Uncle Vernon’s face 
purpled once more, and Aunt Petunia started chewing 
her tongue again. However, they seemed too scared to 
actually say anything. 



Page | 49 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mr. Weasley was looking around. He loved everything 
to do with Muggles. Harry could see him itching to go 
and examine the television and the video recorder. 

“They run off eckeltricity, do they?” he said 
knowledgeably. “Ah yes, I can see the plugs. I collect 
plugs,” he added to Uncle Vernon. “And batteries. Got 
a very large collection of batteries. My wife thinks I’m 
mad, but there you are.” 

Uncle Vernon clearly thought Mr. Weasley was mad 
too. He moved ever so slightly to the right, screening 
Aunt Petunia from view, as though he thought Mr. 
Weasley might suddenly run at them and attack. 

Dudley suddenly reappeared in the room. Harry could 
hear the clunk of his trunk on the stairs, and knew 
that the sounds had scared Dudley out of the kitchen. 
Dudley edged along the wall, gazing at Mr. Weasley 
with terrified eyes, and attempted to conceal himself 
behind his mother and father. Unfortunately, Uncle 
Vernon’s bulk, while sufficient to hide bony Aunt 
Petunia, was nowhere near enough to conceal Dudley. 

“Ah, this is your cousin, is it, Harry?” said Mr. 
Weasley, taking another brave stab at making 
conversation. 

“Yep,” said Harry, “that’s Dudley.” 

He and Ron exchanged glances and then quickly 
looked away from each other; the temptation to burst 
out laughing was almost overwhelming. Dudley was 
still clutching his bottom as though afraid it might 
fall off. Mr. Weasley, however, seemed genuinely 
concerned at Dudley’s peculiar behavior. Indeed, from 
the tone of his voice when he next spoke, Harry was 
quite sure that Mr. Weasley thought Dudley was quite 



Page | 50 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




as mad as the Dursleys thought he was, except that 
Mr. Weasley felt sympathy rather than fear. 

“Having a good holiday, Dudley?” he said kindly. 

Dudley whimpered. Harry saw his hands tighten still 
harder over his massive backside. 

Fred and George came back into the room carrying 
Harry’s school trunk. They glanced around as they 
entered and spotted Dudley. Their faces cracked into 
identical evil grins. 

“Ah, right,” said Mr. Weasley. “Better get cracking 
then.” 

He pushed up the sleeves of his robes and took out 
his wand. Harry saw the Dursleys draw back against 
the wall as one. 

“Incendio\” said Mr. Weasley, pointing his wand at the 
hole in the wall behind him. 

Flames rose at once in the fireplace, crackling merrily 
as though they had been burning for hours. Mr. 
Weasley took a small drawstring bag from his pocket, 
untied it, took a pinch of the powder inside, and 
threw it onto the flames, which turned emerald green 
and roared higher than ever. 

“Off you go then, Fred,” said Mr. Weasley. 

“Coming,” said Fred. “Oh no — hang on — ” 

A bag of sweets had spilled out of Fred’s pocket and 
the contents were now rolling in every direction — 
big, fat toffees in brightly colored wrappers. 



Page | 51 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Fred scrambled around, cramming them back into his 
pocket, then gave the Dursleys a cheery wave, 
stepped forward, and walked right into the fire, saying 
“the Burrow!” Aunt Petunia gave a little shuddering 
gasp. There was a whooshing sound, and Fred 
vanished. 

“Right then, George,” said Mr. Weasley, “you and the 
trunk.” 

Harry helped George carry the trunk forward into the 
flames and turn it onto its end so that he could hold 
it better. Then, with a second whoosh, George had 
cried “the Burrow!” and vanished too. 

“Ron, you next,” said Mr. Weasley. 

“See you,” said Ron brightly to the Dursleys. He 
grinned broadly at Harry, then stepped into the fire, 
shouted “the Burrow!” and disappeared. 

Now Harry and Mr. Weasley alone remained. 

“Well ... T>ye then,” Harry said to the Dursleys. 

They didn’t say anything at all. Harry moved toward 
the fire, but just as he reached the edge of the hearth, 
Mr. Weasley put out a hand and held him back. He 
was looking at the Dursleys in amazement. 

“Harry said good-bye to you,” he said. “Didn’t you 
hear him?” 

“It doesn’t matter,” Harry muttered to Mr. Weasley. 
“Honestly, I don’t care.” 

Mr. Weasley did not remove his hand from Harry’s 
shoulder. 



Page | 52 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You aren’t going to see your nephew till next 
summer,” he said to Uncle Vernon in mild 
indignation. “Surely you’re going to say good-bye?” 

Uncle Vernon’s face worked furiously. The idea of 
being taught consideration by a man who had just 
blasted away half his living room wall seemed to be 
causing him intense suffering. But Mr. Weasley’s 
wand was still in his hand, and Uncle Vernon’s tiny 
eyes darted to it once, before he said, very resentfully, 
“Good-bye, then.” 

“See you,” said Harry, putting one foot forward into 
the green flames, which felt pleasantly like warm 
breath. At that moment, however, a horrible gagging 
sound erupted behind him, and Aunt Petunia started 
to scream. 

Harry wheeled around. Dudley was no longer 
standing behind his parents. He was kneeling beside 
the coffee table, and he was gagging and sputtering 
on a foot-long, purple, slimy thing that was 
protruding from his mouth. One bewildered second 
later, Harry realized that the foot-long thing was 
Dudley’s tongue — and that a brightly colored toffee 
wrapper lay on the floor before him. 

Aunt Petunia hurled herself onto the ground beside 
Dudley, seized the end of his swollen tongue, and 
attempted to wrench it out of his mouth; 
unsurprisingly, Dudley yelled and sputtered worse 
than ever, trying to fight her off. Uncle Vernon was 
bellowing and waving his arms around, and Mr. 
Weasley had to shout to make himself heard. 

“Not to worry, I can sort him out!” he yelled, 
advancing on Dudley with his wand outstretched, but 
Aunt Petunia screamed worse than ever and threw 



Page | 53 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




herself on top of Dudley, shielding him from Mr. 
Weasley. 



“No, really!” said Mr. Weasley desperately. “It’s a 
simple process — it was the toffee — my son Fred — 
real practical joker — but it’s only an Engorgement 
Charm — at least, I think it is — please, I can correct 



it — ” 



But far from being reassured, the Dursleys became 
more panic-stricken; Aunt Petunia was sobbing 
hysterically, tugging Dudley’s tongue as though 
determined to rip it out; Dudley appeared to be 
suffocating under the combined pressure of his 
mother and his tongue; and Uncle Vernon, who had 
lost control completely, seized a china figure from on 
top of the sideboard and threw it very hard at Mr. 
Weasley, who ducked, causing the ornament to 
shatter in the blasted fireplace. 

“Now really!” said Mr. Weasley angrily, brandishing 
his wand. “I’m trying to help\” 

Bellowing like a wounded hippo, Uncle Vernon 
snatched up another ornament. 

“Harry, go! Just go!” Mr. Weasley shouted, his wand 
on Uncle Vernon. “I’ll sort this out!” 

Harry didn’t want to miss the fun, but Uncle Vernon’s 
second ornament narrowly missed his left ear, and on 
balance he thought it best to leave the situation to 
Mr. Weasley. He stepped into the fire, looking over his 
shoulder as he said “the Burrow!” His last fleeting 
glimpse of the living room was of Mr. Weasley blasting 
a third ornament out of Uncle Vernon’s hand with his 
wand, Aunt Petunia screaming and lying on top of 
Dudley, and Dudley’s tongue lolling around like a 
great slimy python. But next moment Harry had 
Page | 54 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




begun to spin very fast, and the Dursleys’ living room 
was whipped out of sight in a rush of emerald-green 
flames. 



Page | 55 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




5 




WEASLEYS’ WIZARD WHEEZES 

Harry spun faster and faster, elbows tucked tightly to 
his sides, blurred fireplaces flashing past him, until 
he started to feel sick and closed his eyes. Then, 
when at last he felt himself slowing down, he threw 
out his hands and came to a halt in time to prevent 
himself from falling face forward out of the Weasleys’ 
kitchen fire. 

“Did he eat it?” said Fred excitedly, holding out a 
hand to pull Harry to his feet. 

“Yeah,” said Harry, straightening up. “What was it?” 

“Ton-Tongue Toffee,” said Fred brightly. “George and I 
invented them, and we’ve been looking for someone to 
test them on all summer. ...” 

The tiny kitchen exploded with laughter; Harry looked 
around and saw that Ron and George were sitting at 
the scrubbed wooden table with two red-haired people 
Harry had never seen before, though he knew 

Page | 56 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



immediately who they must be: Bill and Charlie, the 
two eldest Weasley brothers. 



“How’re you doing, Harry?” said the nearer of the two, 
grinning at him and holding out a large hand, which 
Harry shook, feeling calluses and blisters under his 
fingers. This had to be Charlie, who worked with 
dragons in Romania. Charlie was built like the twins, 
shorter and stockier than Percy and Ron, who were 
both long and lanky. He had a broad, good-natured 
face, which was weather-beaten and so freckly that he 
looked almost tanned; his arms were muscular, and 
one of them had a large, shiny burn on it. 

Bill got to his feet, smiling, and also shook Harry’s 
hand. Bill came as something of a surprise. Harry 
knew that he worked for the wizarding bank, 
Gringotts, and that Bill had been Head Boy at 
Hogwarts; Harry had always imagined Bill to be an 
older version of Percy: fussy about rule-breaking and 
fond of bossing everyone around. However, Bill was — 
there was no other word for it — cool. He was tall, 
with long hair that he had tied back in a ponytail. He 
was wearing an earring with what looked like a fang 
dangling from it. Bill’s clothes would not have looked 
out of place at a rock concert, except that Harry 
recognized his boots to be made, not of leather, but of 
dragon hide. 

Before any of them could say anything else, there was 
a faint popping noise, and Mr. Weasley appeared out 
of thin air at George’s shoulder. He was looking 
angrier than Harry had ever seen him. 

“That wasn’t funny, Fred!” he shouted. “What on 
earth did you give that Muggle boy?” 



Page | 57 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I didn’t give him anything,” said Fred, with another 
evil grin. “I just dropped it. ... It was his fault he went 
and ate it, I never told him to.” 

“You dropped it on purpose!” roared Mr. Weasley. 

“You knew he’d eat it, you knew he was on a diet — ” 

“How big did his tongue get?” George asked eagerly. 

“It was four feet long before his parents would let me 
shrink it!” 

Harry and the Weasleys roared with laughter again. 

“It isn’t funny\” Mr. Weasley shouted. “That sort of 
behavior seriously undermines wizard-Muggle 
relations! I spend half my life campaigning against the 
mistreatment of Muggles, and my own sons — ” 

“We didn’t give it to him because he’s a Muggle!” said 
Fred indignantly. 

“No, we gave it to him because he’s a great bullying 
git,” said George. “Isn’t he, Harry?” 

“Yeah, he is, Mr. Weasley,” said Harry earnestly. 

“That’s not the point!” raged Mr. Weasley. “You wait 
until I tell your mother — ” 

“Tell me what?” said a voice behind them. 

Mrs. Weasley had just entered the kitchen. She was a 
short, plump woman with a very kind face, though 
her eyes were presently narrowed with suspicion. 

“Oh hello, Harry, dear,” she said, spotting him and 
smiling. Then her eyes snapped back to her husband. 
“Tell me what , Arthur?” 

Page | 58 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mr. Weasley hesitated. Harry could tell that, however 
angry he was with Fred and George, he hadn’t really 
intended to tell Mrs. Weasley what had happened. 
There was a silence, while Mr. Weasley eyed his wife 
nervously. Then two girls appeared in the kitchen 
doorway behind Mrs. Weasley. One, with very bushy 
brown hair and rather large front teeth, was Harry’s 
and Ron’s friend, Hermione Granger. The other, who 
was small and red-haired, was Ron’s younger sister, 
Ginny. Both of them smiled at Harry, who grinned 
back, which made Ginny go scarlet — she had been 
very taken with Harry ever since his first visit to the 
Burrow. 

“Tell me what, Arthur?” Mrs. Weasley repeated, in a 
dangerous sort of voice. 

“It’s nothing, Molly,” mumbled Mr. Weasley, “Fred and 
George just — but I’ve had words with them — ” 

“What have they done this time?” said Mrs. Weasley. 
“If it’s got anything to do with Weasleys’ Wizard 
Wheezes — ” 

“Why don’t you show Harry where he’s sleeping, 

Ron?” said Hermione from the doorway. 

“He knows where he’s sleeping,” said Ron, “in my 
room, he slept there last — ” 

“We can all go,” said Hermione pointedly. 

“Oh,” said Ron, cottoning on. “Right.” 

“Yeah, we’ll come too,” said George. 

“You stay where you are!” snarled Mrs. Weasley. 



Page | 59 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry and Ron edged out of the kitchen, and they, 
Hermione, and Ginny set off along the narrow hallway 
and up the rickety staircase that zigzagged through 
the house to the upper stories. 

“What are Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes?” Harry asked 
as they climbed. 

Ron and Ginny both laughed, although Hermione 
didn’t. 

“Mum found this stack of order forms when she was 
cleaning Fred and George’s room,” said Ron quietly. 
“Great long price lists for stuff they’ve invented. Joke 
stuff, you know. Fake wands and trick sweets, loads 
of stuff. It was brilliant, I never knew they’d been 
inventing all that ...” 

“We’ve been hearing explosions out of their room for 
ages, but we never thought they were actually making 
things,” said Ginny. “We thought they just liked the 
noise.” 

“Only, most of the stuff — well, all of it, really — was 
a bit dangerous,” said Ron, “and, you know, they were 
planning to sell it at Hogwarts to make some money, 
and Mum went mad at them. Told them they weren’t 
allowed to make any more of it, and burned all the 
order forms. ... She’s furious at them anyway. They 
didn’t get as many O.W.L.s as she expected.” 

O.W.L.s were Ordinary Wizarding Levels, the 
examinations Hogwarts students took at the age of 
fifteen. 

“And then there was this big row,” Ginny said, 
“because Mum wants them to go into the Ministry of 
Magic like Dad, and they told her all they want to do 
is open a joke shop.” 

Page | 60 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Just then a door on the second landing opened, and a 
face poked out wearing horn-rimmed glasses and a 
very annoyed expression. 

“Hi, Percy,” said Harry. 

“Oh hello, Harry,” said Percy. “I was wondering who 
was making all the noise. I’m trying to work in here, 
you know — I’ve got a report to finish for the office — 
and it’s rather difficult to concentrate when people 
keep thundering up and down the stairs.” 

“We’re not thundering,” said Ron irritably. “We’re 
walking. Sorry if we’ve disturbed the top-secret 
workings of the Ministry of Magic.” 

“What are you working on?” said Harry. 

“A report for the Department of International Magical 
Cooperation,” said Percy smugly. “We’re trying to 
standardize cauldron thickness. Some of these foreign 
imports are just a shade too thin — leakages have 
been increasing at a rate of almost three percent a 
year — ” 

“That’ll change the world, that report will,” said Ron. 
“Front page of the Daily Prophet, I expect, cauldron 
leaks.” 

Percy went slightly pink. 

“You might sneer, Ron,” he said heatedly, “but unless 
some sort of international law is imposed we might 
well find the market flooded with flimsy, shallow- 
bottomed products that seriously endanger — ” 

“Yeah, yeah, all right,” said Ron, and he started off 
upstairs again. Percy slammed his bedroom door 
shut. As Harry, Hermione, and Ginny followed Ron up 

Page | 61 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




three more flights of stairs, shouts from the kitchen 
below echoed up to them. It sounded as though Mr. 
Weasley had told Mrs. Weasley about the toffees. 

The room at the top of the house where Ron slept 
looked much as it had the last time that Harry had 
come to stay: the same posters of Ron’s favorite 
Quidditch team, the Chudley Cannons, were whirling 
and waving on the walls and sloping ceiling, and the 
fish tank on the windowsill, which had previously 
held frog spawn, now contained one extremely large 
frog. Ron’s old rat, Scabbers, was here no more, but 
instead there was the tiny gray owl that had delivered 
Ron’s letter to Harry in Privet Drive. It was hopping 
up and down in a small cage and twittering madly. 

“Shut up, Pig,” said Ron, edging his way between two 
of the four beds that had been squeezed into the 
room. “Fred and George are in here with us, because 
Bill and Charlie are in their room,” he told Harry. 
“Percy gets to keep his room all to himself because 
he’s got to work.” 

“Er — why are you calling that owl Pig?” Harry asked 
Ron. 

“Because he’s being stupid,” said Ginny. “Its proper 
name is Pigwidgeon.” 

“Yeah, and that’s not a stupid name at all,” said Ron 
sarcastically. “Ginny named him,” he explained to 
Harry. “She reckons it’s sweet. And I tried to change 
it, but it was too late, he won’t answer to anything 
else. So now he’s Pig. I’ve got to keep him up here 
because he annoys Errol and Hermes. He annoys me 
too, come to that.” 

Pigwidgeon zoomed happily around his cage, hooting 
shrilly. Harry knew Ron too well to take him 

Page | 62 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




seriously. He had moaned continually about his old 
rat, Scabbers, but had been most upset when 
Hermione’s cat, Crookshanks, appeared to have eaten 
him. 

“Where’s Crookshanks?” Harry asked Hermione now. 

“Out in the garden, I expect,” she said. “He likes 
chasing gnomes. He’s never seen any before.” 

“Percy’s enjoying work, then?” said Harry, sitting 
down on one of the beds and watching the Chudley 
Cannons zooming in and out of the posters on the 
ceiling. 

“Enjoying it?” said Ron darkly. “I don’t reckon he’d 
come home if Dad didn’t make him. He’s obsessed. 
Just don’t get him onto the subject of his boss. 
According to Mr. Crouch ... as I was saying to Mr. 
Crouch . . . Mr. Crouch is of the opinion . . . Mr. Crouch 
was telling me ... They 11 be announcing their 
engagement any day now.” 

“Have you had a good summer, Harry?” said 
Hermione. “Did you get our food parcels and 
everything?” 

“Yeah, thanks a lot,” said Harry. “They saved my life, 
those cakes.” 

“And have you heard from — ?” Ron began, but at a 
look from Hermione he fell silent. Harry knew Ron 
had been about to ask about Sirius. Ron and 
Hermione had been so deeply involved in helping 
Sirius escape from the Ministry of Magic that they 
were almost as concerned about Harry’s godfather as 
he was. However, discussing him in front of Ginny 
was a bad idea. Nobody but themselves and Professor 



Page | 63 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore knew about how Sirius had escaped, or 
believed in his innocence. 

“I think they’ve stopped arguing,” said Hermione, to 
cover the awkward moment, because Ginny was 
looking curiously from Ron to Harry. “Shall we go 
down and help your mum with dinner?” 

“Yeah, all right,” said Ron. The four of them left Ron’s 
room and went back downstairs to find Mrs. Weasley 
alone in the kitchen, looking extremely bad-tempered. 

“We’re eating out in the garden,” she said when they 
came in. “There’s just not room for eleven people in 
here. Could you take the plates outside, girls? Bill 
and Charlie are setting up the tables. Knives and 
forks, please, you two,” she said to Ron and Harry, 
pointing her wand a little more vigorously than she 
had intended at a pile of potatoes in the sink, which 
shot out of their skins so fast that they ricocheted off 
the walls and ceiling. 

“Oh for heaven’s sake,” she snapped, now directing 
her wand at a dustpan, which hopped off the 
sideboard and started skating across the floor, 
scooping up the potatoes. “Those two!” she burst out 
savagely, now pulling pots and pans out of a 
cupboard, and Harry knew she meant Fred and 
George. “I don’t know what’s going to happen to them, 
I really don’t. No ambition, unless you count making 
as much trouble as they possibly can. ...” 

Mrs. Weasley slammed a large copper saucepan down 
on the kitchen table and began to wave her wand 
around inside it. A creamy sauce poured from the 
wand tip as she stirred. 

“It’s not as though they haven’t got brains,” she 
continued irritably, taking the saucepan over to the 

Page | 64 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




stove and lighting it with a further poke of her wand, 
“but they’re wasting them, and unless they pull 
themselves together soon, they’ll be in real trouble. 
I’ve had more owls from Hogwarts about them than 
the rest put together. If they carry on the way they’re 
going, they’ll end up in front of the Improper Use of 
Magic Office.” 

Mrs. Weasley jabbed her wand at the cutlery drawer, 
which shot open. Harry and Ron both jumped out of 
the way as several knives soared out of it, flew across 
the kitchen, and began chopping the potatoes, which 
had just been tipped back into the sink by the 
dustpan. 

“I don’t know where we went wrong with them,” said 
Mrs. Weasley, putting down her wand and starting to 
pull out still more saucepans. “It’s been the same for 
years, one thing after another, and they won’t listen 
to — OH NOT AGAIN.” 

She had picked up her wand from the table, and it 
had emitted a loud squeak and turned into a giant 
rubber mouse. 

“One of their fake wands again!” she shouted. “How 
many times have I told them not to leave them lying 
around?” 

She grabbed her real wand and turned around to find 
that the sauce on the stove was smoking. 

“C’mon,” Ron said hurriedly to Harry, seizing a 
handful of cutlery from the open drawer, “let’s go and 
help Bill and Charlie.” 

They left Mrs. Weasley and headed out the back door 
into the yard. 



Page | 65 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




They had only gone a few paces when Hermione’s 
bandy-legged ginger cat, Crookshanks, came pelting 
out of the garden, bottle-brush tail held high in the 
air, chasing what looked like a muddy potato on legs. 
Harry recognized it instantly as a gnome. Barely ten 
inches high, its horny little feet pattered very fast as it 
sprinted across the yard and dived headlong into one 
of the Wellington boots that lay scattered around the 
door. Harry could hear the gnome giggling madly as 
Crookshanks inserted a paw into the boot, trying to 
reach it. Meanwhile, a very loud crashing noise was 
coming from the other side of the house. The source 
of the commotion was revealed as they entered the 
garden, and saw that Bill and Charlie both had their 
wands out, and were making two battered old tables 
fly high above the lawn, smashing into each other, 
each attempting to knock the other’s out of the air. 
Fred and George were cheering, Ginny was laughing, 
and Hermione was hovering near the hedge, 
apparently torn between amusement and anxiety. 

Bill’s table caught Charlie’s with a huge bang and 
knocked one of its legs off. There was a clatter from 
overhead, and they all looked up to see Percy’s head 
poking out of a window on the second floor. 

“Will you keep it down?!” he bellowed. 

“Sorry, Perce,” said Bill, grinning. “How’re the 
cauldron bottoms coming on?” 

“Very badly,” said Percy peevishly, and he slammed 
the window shut. Chuckling, Bill and Charlie directed 
the tables safely onto the grass, end to end, and then, 
with a flick of his wand, Bill reattached the table leg 
and conjured tablecloths from nowhere. 

By seven o’clock, the two tables were groaning under 
dishes and dishes of Mrs. Weasley’s excellent cooking, 

Page | 66 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




and the nine Weasleys, Harry, and Hermione were 
settling themselves down to eat beneath a clear, deep- 
blue sky. To somebody who had been living on meals 
of increasingly stale cake all summer, this was 
paradise, and at first, Harry listened rather than 
talked as he helped himself to chicken and ham pie, 
boiled potatoes, and salad. 

At the far end of the table, Percy was telling his father 
all about his report on cauldron bottoms. 

“I’ve told Mr. Crouch that I’ll have it ready by 
Tuesday,” Percy was saying pompously. “That’s a bit 
sooner than he expected it, but I like to keep on top of 
things. I think he’ll be grateful I’ve done it in good 
time, I mean, it’s extremely busy in our department 
just now, what with all the arrangements for the 
World Cup. We’re just not getting the support we 
need from the Department of Magical Games and 
Sports. Ludo Bagman — ” 

“I like Ludo,” said Mr. Weasley mildly. “He was the 
one who got us such good tickets for the Cup. I did 
him a bit of a favor: His brother, Otto, got into a spot 
of trouble — a lawnmower with unnatural powers — I 
smoothed the whole thing over.” 

“Oh Bagman’s likable enough, of course,” said Percy 
dismissively, “but how he ever got to be Head of 
Department ... when I compare him to Mr. Crouch! I 
can’t see Mr. Crouch losing a member of our 
department and not trying to find out what’s 
happened to them. You realize Bertha Jorkins has 
been missing for over a month now? Went on holiday 
to Albania and never came back?” 

“Yes, I was asking Ludo about that,” said Mr. 

Weasley, frowning. “He says Bertha’s gotten lost 



Page | 67 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




plenty of times before now — though I must say, if it 
was someone in my department, I’d be worried. ...” 

“Oh Bertha’s hopeless, all right,” said Percy. “I hear 
she’s been shunted from department to department 
for years, much more trouble than she’s worth ... but 
all the same, Bagman ought to be trying to find her. 
Mr. Crouch has been taking a personal interest, she 
worked in our department at one time, you know, and 
I think Mr. Crouch was quite fond of her — but 
Bagman just keeps laughing and saying she probably 
misread the map and ended up in Australia instead of 
Albania. However” — Percy heaved an impressive sigh 
and took a deep swig of elderflower wine — “we’ve got 
quite enough on our plates at the Department of 
International Magical Cooperation without trying to 
find members of other departments too. As you know, 
we’ve got another big event to organize right after the 
World Cup.” 

Percy cleared his throat significantly and looked down 
toward the end of the table where Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione were sitting. “ You know the one I’m talking 
about, Father.” He raised his voice slightly. “The top- 
secret one.” 

Ron rolled his eyes and muttered to Harry and 
Hermione, “He’s been trying to get us to ask what that 
event is ever since he started work. Probably an 
exhibition of thick-bottomed cauldrons.” 

In the middle of the table, Mrs. Weasley was arguing 
with Bill about his earring, which seemed to be a 
recent acquisition. 

“... with a horrible great fang on it. Really, Bill, what 
do they say at the bank?” 



Page | 68 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Mum, no one at the bank gives a damn how I dress 
as long as I bring home plenty of treasure,” said Bill 
patiently. 

“And your hair’s getting silly, dear,” said Mrs. 

Weasley, fingering her wand lovingly. “I wish you’d let 
me give it a trim. ...” 

“I like it,” said Ginny, who was sitting beside Bill. 
“You’re so old-fashioned, Mum. Anyway, it’s nowhere 
near as long as Professor Dumbledore’s. ...” 

Next to Mrs. Weasley, Fred, George, and Charlie were 
all talking spiritedly about the World Cup. 

“It’s got to be Ireland,” said Charlie thickly, through a 
mouthful of potato. “They flattened Peru in the 
semifinals.” 

“Bulgaria has got Viktor Krum, though,” said Fred. 

“Krum’s one decent player, Ireland has got seven,” 
said Charlie shortly. “I wish England had got through. 
That was embarrassing, that was.” 

“What happened?” said Harry eagerly, regretting more 
than ever his isolation from the wizarding world when 
he was stuck on Privet Drive. 

“Went down to Transylvania, three hundred and 
ninety to ten,” said Charlie gloomily. “Shocking 
performance. And Wales lost to Uganda, and Scotland 
was slaughtered by Luxembourg.” 

Harry had been on the Gryffindor House Quidditch 
team ever since his first year at Hogwarts and owned 
one of the best racing brooms in the world, a Firebolt. 
Flying came more naturally to Harry than anything 



Page | 69 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




else in the magical world, and he played in the 
position of Seeker on the Gryffindor House team. 

Mr. Weasley conjured up candles to light the 
darkening garden before they had their homemade 
strawberry ice cream, and by the time they had 
finished, moths were fluttering low over the table, and 
the warm air was perfumed with the smells of grass 
and honeysuckle. Harry was feeling extremely well fed 
and at peace with the world as he watched several 
gnomes sprinting through the rosebushes, laughing 
madly and closely pursued by Crookshanks. 

Ron looked carefully up the table to check that the 
rest of the family were all busy talking, then he said 
very quietly to Harry, “So — have you heard from 
Sirius lately?” 

Hermione looked around, listening closely. 

“Yeah,” said Harry softly, “twice. He sounds okay. I 
wrote to him yesterday. He might write back while I’m 
here.” 

He suddenly remembered the reason he had written 
to Sirius, and for a moment was on the verge of telling 
Ron and Hermione about his scar hurting again, and 
about the dream that had awoken him . . . but he 
really didn’t want to worry them just now, not when 
he himself was feeling so happy and peaceful. 

“Look at the time,” Mrs. Weasley said suddenly, 
checking her wristwatch. “You really should be in 
bed, the whole lot of you — you’ll be up at the crack 
of dawn to get to the Cup. Harry, if you leave your 
school list out, I’ll get your things for you tomorrow in 
Diagon Alley. I’m getting everyone else’s. There might 
not be time after the World Cup, the match went on 
for five days last time.” 

Page | 70 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




“Wow — hope it does this time!” said Harry 
enthusiastically. 

“Well, I certainly don’t,” said Percy sanctimoniously. “I 
shudder to think what the state of my in-tray would 
be if I was away from work for five days.” 

“Yeah, someone might slip dragon dung in it again, 
eh, Perce?” said Fred. 

“That was a sample of fertilizer from Norway!” said 
Percy, going very red in the face. “It was nothing 
personall” 

“It was,” Fred whispered to Harry as they got up from 
the table. “We sent it.” 



Page | 71 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 







THE PORTKEY 

Harry felt as though he had barely lain down to sleep 
in Ron’s room when he was being shaken awake by 
Mrs. Weasley. 

“Time to go, Harry, dear,” she whispered, moving 
away to wake Ron. 

Harry felt around for his glasses, put them on, and 
sat up. It was still dark outside. Ron muttered 
indistinctly as his mother roused him. At the foot of 
Harry’s mattress he saw two large, disheveled shapes 
emerging from tangles of blankets. 

“ ’S’ time already?” said Fred groggily. 

They dressed in silence, too sleepy to talk, then, 
yawning and stretching, the four of them headed 
downstairs into the kitchen. 

Mrs. Weasley was stirring the contents of a large pot 
on the stove, while Mr. Weasley was sitting at the 
table, checking a sheaf of large parchment tickets. He 

Page | 72 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



looked up as the boys entered and spread his arms so 
that they could see his clothes more clearly. He was 
wearing what appeared to be a golfing sweater and a 
very old pair of jeans, slightly too big for him and held 
up with a thick leather belt. 

“What d’you think?” he asked anxiously. “We’re 
supposed to go incognito — do I look like a Muggle, 
Harry?” 

“Yeah,” said Harry, smiling, “very good.” 

“Where ’re Bill and Charlie and Per-Per-Percy?” said 
George, failing to stifle a huge yawn. 

“Well, they’re Apparating, aren’t they?” said Mrs. 
Weasley, heaving the large pot over to the table and 
starting to ladle porridge into bowls. “So they can 
have a bit of a lie-in.” 

Harry knew that Apparating meant disappearing from 
one place and reappearing almost instantly in 
another, but had never known any Hogwarts student 
to do it, and understood that it was very difficult. 

“So they’re still in bed?” said Fred grumpily, pulling 
his bowl of porridge toward him. “Why can’t we 
Apparate too?” 

“Because you’re not of age and you haven’t passed 
your test,” snapped Mrs. Weasley. “And where have 
those girls got to?” 

She bustled out of the kitchen and they heard her 
climbing the stairs. 

“You have to pass a test to Apparate?” Harry asked. 



Page | 73 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh yes,” said Mr. Weasley, tucking the tickets safely 
into the back pocket of his jeans. “The Department of 
Magical Transportation had to fine a couple of people 
the other day for Apparating without a license. It’s not 
easy, Apparition, and when it’s not done properly it 
can lead to nasty complications. This pair I’m talking 
about went and splinched themselves.” 

Everyone around the table except Harry winced. 

“Er — splinched?” said Harry. 

“They left half of themselves behind,” said Mr. 

Weasley, now spooning large amounts of treacle onto 
his porridge. “So, of course, they were stuck. Couldn’t 
move either way. Had to wait for the Accidental Magic 
Reversal Squad to sort them out. Meant a fair old bit 
of paperwork, I can tell you, what with the Muggles 
who spotted the body parts they’d left behind. ...” 

Harry had a sudden vision of a pair of legs and an 
eyeball lying abandoned on the pavement of Privet 
Drive. 

“Were they okay?” he asked, startled. 

“Oh yes,” said Mr. Weasley matter-of-factly. “But they 
got a heavy fine, and I don’t think they’ll be trying it 
again in a hurry. You don’t mess around with 
Apparition. There are plenty of adult wizards who 
don’t bother with it. Prefer brooms — slower, but 
safer.” 

“But Bill and Charlie and Percy can all do it?” 

“Charlie had to take the test twice,” said Fred, 
grinning. “He failed the first time, Apparated five 
miles south of where he meant to, right on top of 
some poor old dear doing her shopping, remember?” 

Page | 74 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes, well, he passed the second time,” said Mrs. 
Weasley, marching back into the kitchen amid hearty 
sniggers. 

“Percy only passed two weeks ago,” said George. “He’s 
been Apparating downstairs every morning since, just 
to prove he can.” 

There were footsteps down the passageway and 
Hermione and Ginny came into the kitchen, both 
looking pale and drowsy. 

“Why do we have to be up so early?” Ginny said, 
rubbing her eyes and sitting down at the table. 

“We’ve got a bit of a walk,” said Mr. Weasley. 

“Walk?” said Harry. “What, are we walking to the 
World Cup?” 

“No, no, that’s miles away,” said Mr. Weasley, smiling. 
“We only need to walk a short way. It’s just that it’s 
very difficult for a large number of wizards to 
congregate without attracting Muggle attention. We 
have to be very careful about how we travel at the 
best of times, and on a huge occasion like the 
Quidditch World Cup — ” 

“George!” said Mrs. Weasley sharply, and they all 
jumped. 

“What?” said George, in an innocent tone that 
deceived nobody. 

“What is that in your pocket?” 

“Nothing!” 

“Don’t you lie to me!” 

Page | 75 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mrs. Weasley pointed her wand at George’s pocket 
and said, “Acciol” 

Several small, brightly colored objects zoomed out of 
George’s pocket; he made a grab for them but missed, 
and they sped right into Mrs. Weasley ’s outstretched 
hand. 

“We told you to destroy them!” said Mrs. Weasley 
furiously, holding up what were unmistakably more 
Ton-Tongue Toffees. “We told you to get rid of the lot! 
Empty your pockets, go on, both of you!” 

It was an unpleasant scene; the twins had evidently 
been trying to smuggle as many toffees out of the 
house as possible, and it was only by using her 
Summoning Charm that Mrs. Weasley managed to 
find them all. 

“Acciol Acciol Acciol” she shouted, and toffees zoomed 
from all sorts of unlikely places, including the lining 
of George’s jacket and the turn-ups of Fred’s jeans. 

“We spent six months developing those!” Fred 
shouted at his mother as she threw the toffees away. 

“Oh a fine way to spend six months!” she shrieked. 

“No wonder you didn’t get more O.W.L.s!” 

All in all, the atmosphere was not very friendly as 
they took their departure. Mrs. Weasley was still 
glowering as she kissed Mr. Weasley on the cheek, 
though not nearly as much as the twins, who had 
each hoisted their rucksacks onto their backs and 
walked out without a word to her. 

“Well, have a lovely time,” said Mrs. Weasley, “and 
behave yourselves,” she called after the twins’ 
retreating backs, but they did not look back or 

Page | 76 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




answer. “I’ll send Bill, Charlie, and Percy along 
around midday,” Mrs. Weasley said to Mr. Weasley, as 
he, Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Ginny set off across 
the dark yard after Fred and George. 

It was chilly and the moon was still out. Only a dull, 
greenish tinge along the horizon to their right showed 
that daybreak was drawing closer. Harry, having been 
thinking about thousands of wizards speeding toward 
the Quidditch World Cup, sped up to walk with Mr. 
Weasley. 

“So how does everyone get there without all the 
Muggles noticing?” he asked. 

“It’s been a massive organizational problem,” sighed 
Mr. Weasley. “The trouble is, about a hundred 
thousand wizards turn up at the World Cup, and of 
course, we just haven’t got a magical site big enough 
to accommodate them all. There are places Muggles 
can’t penetrate, but imagine trying to pack a hundred 
thousand wizards into Diagon Alley or platform nine 
and three-quarters. So we had to find a nice deserted 
moor, and set up as many anti-Muggle precautions as 
possible. The whole Ministry’s been working on it for 
months. First, of course, we have to stagger the 
arrivals. People with cheaper tickets have to arrive 
two weeks beforehand. A limited number use Muggle 
transport, but we can’t have too many clogging up 
their buses and trains — remember, wizards are 
coming from all over the world. Some Apparate, of 
course, but we have to set up safe points for them to 
appear, well away from Muggles. I believe there’s a 
handy wood they’re using as the Apparition point. For 
those who don’t want to Apparate, or can’t, we use 
Portkeys. They’re objects that are used to transport 
wizards from one spot to another at a prearranged 
time. You can do large groups at a time if you need to. 
There have been two hundred Portkeys placed at 
Page | 77 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




strategic points around Britain, and the nearest one 
to us is up at the top of Stoatshead Hill, so that’s 
where we’re headed.” 

Mr. Weasley pointed ahead of them, where a large 
black mass rose beyond the village of Ottery St. 
Catchpole. 

“What sort of objects are Portkeys?” said Harry 
curiously. 

“Well, they can be anything,” said Mr. Weasley. 
“Unobtrusive things, obviously, so Muggles don’t go 
picking them up and playing with them . . . stuff they’ll 
just think is litter. ...” 

They trudged down the dark, dank lane toward the 
village, the silence broken only by their footsteps. The 
sky lightened very slowly as they made their way 
through the village, its inky blackness diluting to 
deepest blue. Harry’s hands and feet were freezing. 

Mr. Weasley kept checking his watch. 

They didn’t have breath to spare for talking as they 
began to climb Stoatshead Hill, stumbling 
occasionally in hidden rabbit holes, slipping on thick 
black tuffets of grass. Each breath Harry took was 
sharp in his chest and his legs were starting to seize 
up when, at last, his feet found level ground. 

“Whew,” panted Mr. Weasley, taking off his glasses 
and wiping them on his sweater. “Well, we’ve made 
good time — we’ve got ten minutes. ...” 

Hermione came over the crest of the hill last, 
clutching a stitch in her side. 



Page | 78 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Now we just need the Portkey,” said Mr. Weasley, 
replacing his glasses and squinting around at the 
ground. “It won’t be big. ... Come on ...” 

They spread out, searching. They had only been at it 
for a couple of minutes, however, when a shout rent 
the still air. 

“Over here, Arthur! Over here, son, we’ve got it!” 

Two tall figures were silhouetted against the starry 
sky on the other side of the hilltop. 

“Amos!” said Mr. Weasley, smiling as he strode over to 
the man who had shouted. The rest of them followed. 

Mr. Weasley was shaking hands with a ruddy-faced 
wizard with a scrubby brown beard, who was holding 
a moldy-looking old boot in his other hand. 

“This is Amos Diggory, everyone,” said Mr. Weasley. 
“He works for the Department for the Regulation and 
Control of Magical Creatures. And I think you know 
his son, Cedric?” 

Cedric Diggory was an extremely handsome boy of 
around seventeen. He was Captain and Seeker of the 
Hufflepuff House Quidditch team at Hogwarts. 

“Hi,” said Cedric, looking around at them all. 

Everybody said hi back except Fred and George, who 
merely nodded. They had never quite forgiven Cedric 
for beating their team, Gryffindor, in the first 
Quidditch match of the previous year. 

“Long walk, Arthur?” Cedric’s father asked. 



Page | 79 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Not too bad,” said Mr. Weasley. “We live just on the 
other side of the village there. You?” 

“Had to get up at two, didn’t we, Ced? I tell you, I’ll be 
glad when he’s got his Apparition test. Still ... not 
complaining ... Quidditch World Cup, wouldn’t miss it 
for a sackful of Galleons — and the tickets cost about 
that. Mind you, looks like I got off easy. ...” Amos 
Diggory peered good-naturedly around at the three 
Weasley boys, Harry, Hermione, and Ginny. “All these 
yours, Arthur?” 

“Oh no, only the redheads,” said Mr. Weasley, 
pointing out his children. “This is Hermione, friend of 
Ron’s — and Harry, another friend — ” 

“Merlin’s beard,” said Amos Diggory, his eyes 
widening. “Harry? Harry Potter?” 

“Er — yeah,” said Harry. 

Harry was used to people looking curiously at him 
when they met him, used to the way their eyes moved 
at once to the lightning scar on his forehead, but it 
always made him feel uncomfortable. 

“Ced’s talked about you, of course,” said Amos 
Diggory. “Told us all about playing against you last 
year. ... I said to him, I said — Ced, that’ll be 
something to tell your grandchildren, that will. ... You 
beat Harry Potterl” 

Harry couldn’t think of any reply to this, so he 
remained silent. Fred and George were both scowling 
again. Cedric looked slightly embarrassed. 

“Harry fell off his broom, Dad,” he muttered. “I told 
you ... it was an accident. ...” 



Page | 80 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes, but you didn’t fall off, did you?” roared Amos 
genially, slapping his son on his back. “Always 
modest, our Ced, always the gentleman ... but the 
best man won, I’m sure Harry’d say the same, 
wouldn’t you, eh? One falls off his broom, one stays 
on, you don’t need to be a genius to tell which one’s 
the better flier!” 

“Must be nearly time,” said Mr. Weasley quickly, 
pulling out his watch again. “Do you know whether 
we’re waiting for any more, Amos?” 

“No, the Lovegoods have been there for a week already 
and the Fawcetts couldn’t get tickets,” said Mr. 
Diggory. “There aren’t any more of us in this area, are 
there?” 

“Not that I know of,” said Mr. Weasley. “Yes, it’s a 
minute off. ... We’d better get ready. ...” 

He looked around at Harry and Hermione. 

“You just need to touch the Portkey, that’s all, a 
finger will do — ” 

With difficulty, owing to their bulky backpacks, the 
nine of them crowded around the old boot held out by 
Amos Diggory. 

They all stood there, in a tight circle, as a chill breeze 
swept over the hilltop. Nobody spoke. It suddenly 
occurred to Harry how odd this would look if a 
Muggle were to walk up here now ... nine people, two 
of them grown men, clutching this manky old boot in 
the semidarkness, waiting. ... 

“Three ...” muttered Mr. Weasley, one eye still on his 
watch, “two ... one ...” 



Page | 81 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




It happened immediately: Harry felt as though a hook 
just behind his navel had been suddenly jerked 
irresistibly forward. His feet left the ground; he could 
feel Ron and Hermione on either side of him, their 
shoulders banging into his; they were all speeding 
forward in a howl of wind and swirling color; his 
forefinger was stuck to the boot as though it was 
pulling him magnetically onward and then — 

His feet slammed into the ground; Ron staggered into 
him and he fell over; the Portkey hit the ground near 
his head with a heavy thud. 

Harry looked up. Mr. Weasley, Mr. Diggory, and 
Cedric were still standing, though looking very 
windswept; everybody else was on the ground. 

“Seven past five from Stoatshead Hill,” said a voice. 



Page | 82 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




7 




BAGMAN AND CROUCH 

Harry disentangled himself from Ron and got to his 
feet. They had arrived on what appeared to be a 
deserted stretch of misty moor. In front of them was a 
pair of tired and grumpy-looking wizards, one of 
whom was holding a large gold watch, the other a 
thick roll of parchment and a quill. Both were dressed 
as Muggles, though very inexpertly: The man with the 
watch wore a tweed suit with thigh-length galoshes; 
his colleague, a kilt and a poncho. 

“Morning, Basil,” said Mr. Weasley, picking up the 
boot and handing it to the kilted wizard, who threw it 
into a large box of used Portkeys beside him; Harry 
could see an old newspaper, an empty drinks can, 
and a punctured football. 

“Hello there, Arthur,” said Basil wearily. “Not on duty, 
eh? It’s all right for some. ... We’ve been here all 
night. ... You’d better get out of the way, we’ve got a 
big party coming in from the Black Forest at five- 
fifteen. Hang on, I’ll find your campsite. ... Weasley ... 
Weasley ...” He consulted his parchment list. “About a 
Page | 83 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



quarter of a mile’s walk over there, first field you 
come to. Site manager’s called Mr. Roberts. Diggory ... 
second field ... ask for Mr. Payne.” 

“Thanks, Basil,” said Mr. Weasley, and he beckoned 
everyone to follow him. 

They set off across the deserted moor, unable to make 
out much through the mist. After about twenty 
minutes, a small stone cottage next to a gate swam 
into view. Beyond it, Harry could just make out the 
ghostly shapes of hundreds and hundreds of tents, 
rising up the gentle slope of a large field toward a 
dark wood on the horizon. They said good-bye to the 
Diggorys and approached the cottage door. 

A man was standing in the doorway, looking out at 
the tents. Harry knew at a glance that this was the 
only real Muggle for several acres. When he heard 
their footsteps, he turned his head to look at them. 

“Morning!” said Mr. Weasley brightly. 

“Morning,” said the Muggle. 

“Would you be Mr. Roberts?” 

“Aye, I would,” said Mr. Roberts. “And who’re you?” 

“Weasley — two tents, booked a couple of days ago?” 

“Aye,” said Mr. Roberts, consulting a list tacked to the 
door. “You’ve got a space up by the wood there. Just 
the one night?” 

“That’s it,” said Mr. Weasley. 

“You’ll be paying now, then?” said Mr. Roberts. 



Page | 84 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Ah — right — certainly — ” said Mr. Weasley. He 
retreated a short distance from the cottage and 
beckoned Harry toward him. “Help me, Harry,” he 
muttered, pulling a roll of Muggle money from his 
pocket and starting to peel the notes apart. “This 
one’s a — a — a ten? Ah yes, I see the little number 
on it now. ... So this is a five?” 

“A twenty,” Harry corrected him in an undertone, 
uncomfortably aware of Mr. Roberts trying to catch 
every word. 

“Ah yes, so it is. ... I don’t know, these little bits of 
paper ...” 

“You foreign?” said Mr. Roberts as Mr. Weasley 
returned with the correct notes. 

“Foreign?” repeated Mr. Weasley, puzzled. 

“You’re not the first one who’s had trouble with 
money,” said Mr. Roberts, scrutinizing Mr. Weasley 
closely. “I had two try and pay me with great gold 
coins the size of hubcaps ten minutes ago.” 

“Did you really?” said Mr. Weasley nervously. 

Mr. Roberts rummaged around in a tin for some 
change. 

“Never been this crowded,” he said suddenly, looking 
out over the misty field again. “Hundreds of pre- 
bookings. People usually just turn up. ...” 

“Is that right?” said Mr. Weasley, his hand held out 
for his change, but Mr. Roberts didn’t give it to him. 

“Aye,” he said thoughtfully. “People from all over. 
Loads of foreigners. And not just foreigners. Weirdos, 

Page | 85 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




you know? There’s a bloke walking ’round in a kilt 
and a poncho.” 

“Shouldn’t he?” said Mr. Weasley anxiously. 

“It’s like some sort of ... I dunno ... like some sort of 
rally,” said Mr. Roberts. “They all seem to know each 
other. Like a big party.” 

At that moment, a wizard in plus-fours appeared out 
of thin air next to Mr. Roberts’s front door. 

“Obliviate\” he said sharply, pointing his wand at Mr. 
Roberts. 

Instantly, Mr. Roberts’s eyes slid out of focus, his 
brows unknitted, and a look of dreamy unconcern fell 
over his face. Harry recognized the symptoms of one 
who had just had his memory modified. 

“A map of the campsite for you,” Mr. Roberts said 
placidly to Mr. Weasley. “And your change.” 

“Thanks very much,” said Mr. Weasley. 

The wizard in plus-fours accompanied them toward 
the gate to the campsite. He looked exhausted: His 
chin was blue with stubble and there were deep 
purple shadows under his eyes. Once out of earshot 
of Mr. Roberts, he muttered to Mr. Weasley, “Been 
having a lot of trouble with him. Needs a Memory 
Charm ten times a day to keep him happy. And Ludo 
Bagman’s not helping. Trotting around talking about 
Bludgers and Quaffles at the top of his voice, not a 
worry about anti-Muggle security. Blimey, I’ll be glad 
when this is over. See you later, Arthur.” 

He Disapparated. 



Page | 86 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I thought Mr. Bagman was Head of Magical Games 
and Sports,” said Ginny, looking surprised. “He 
should know better than to talk about Bludgers near 
Muggles, shouldn’t he?” 

“He should,” said Mr. Weasley, smiling, and leading 
them through the gates into the campsite, “but Ludo’s 
always been a bit ... well ... lax about security. You 
couldn’t wish for a more enthusiastic head of the 
sports department though. He played Quidditch for 
England himself, you know. And he was the best 
Beater the Wimbourne Wasps ever had.” 

They trudged up the misty field between long rows of 
tents. Most looked almost ordinary; their owners had 
clearly tried to make them as Muggle-like as possible, 
but had slipped up by adding chimneys, or bellpulls, 
or weather vanes. However, here and there was a tent 
so obviously magical that Harry could hardly be 
surprised that Mr. Roberts was getting suspicious. 
Halfway up the field stood an extravagant confection 
of striped silk like a miniature palace, with several 
live peacocks tethered at the entrance. A little farther 
on they passed a tent that had three floors and 
several turrets; and a short way beyond that was a 
tent that had a front garden attached, complete with 
birdbath, sundial, and fountain. 

“Always the same,” said Mr. Weasley, smiling. “We 
can’t resist showing off when we get together. Ah, 
here we are, look, this is us.” 

They had reached the very edge of the wood at the top 
of the field, and here was an empty space, with a 
small sign hammered into the ground that read 
WEEZLY. 

“Couldn’t have a better spot!” said Mr. Weasley 
happily. “The field is just on the other side of the 

Page | 87 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




wood there, we’re as close as we could be.” He hoisted 
his backpack from his shoulders. “Right,” he said 
excitedly, “no magic allowed, strictly speaking, not 
when we’re out in these numbers on Muggle land. 
We’ll be putting these tents up by hand! Shouldn’t be 
too difficult. ... Muggles do it all the time. ... Here, 
Harry, where do you reckon we should start?” 

Harry had never been camping in his life; the 
Dursleys had never taken him on any kind of holiday, 
preferring to leave him with Mrs. Figg, an old 
neighbor. However, he and Hermione worked out 
where most of the poles and pegs should go, and 
though Mr. Weasley was more of a hindrance than a 
help, because he got thoroughly overexcited when it 
came to using the mallet, they finally managed to 
erect a pair of shabby two-man tents. 

All of them stood back to admire their handiwork. 
Nobody looking at these tents would guess they 
belonged to wizards, Harry thought, but the trouble 
was that once Bill, Charlie, and Percy arrived, they 
would be a party of ten. Hermione seemed to have 
spotted this problem too; she gave Harry a quizzical 
look as Mr. Weasley dropped to his hands and knees 
and entered the first tent. 

“Well be a bit cramped,” he called, “but I think we’ll 
all squeeze in. Come and have a look.” 

Harry bent down, ducked under the tent flap, and felt 
his jaw drop. He had walked into what looked like an 
old-fashioned, three-room flat, complete with 
bathroom and kitchen. Oddly enough, it was 
furnished in exactly the same sort of style as Mrs. 
Figg’s house: There were crocheted covers on the 
mismatched chairs and a strong smell of cats. 



Page | 88 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, it’s not for long,” said Mr. Weasley, mopping his 
bald patch with a handkerchief and peering in at the 
four bunk beds that stood in the bedroom. “I 
borrowed this from Perkins at the office. Doesn’t 
camp much anymore, poor fellow, he’s got lumbago.” 

He picked up the dusty kettle and peered inside it. 
“Well need water. ...” 

“There’s a tap marked on this map the Muggle gave 
us,” said Ron, who had followed Harry inside the tent 
and seemed completely unimpressed by its 
extraordinary inner proportions. “It’s on the other 
side of the field.” 

“Well, why don’t you, Harry, and Hermione go and get 
us some water then” — Mr. Weasley handed over the 
kettle and a couple of saucepans — “and the rest of 
us will get some wood for a fire?” 

“But we’ve got an oven,” said Ron. “Why can’t we just 



“Ron, anti-Muggle security!” said Mr. Weasley, his 
face shining with anticipation. “When real Muggles 
camp, they cook on fires outdoors. I’ve seen them at 



it! 






After a quick tour of the girls’ tent, which was slightly 
smaller than the boys’, though without the smell of 
cats, Harry, Ron, and Hermione set off across the 
campsite with the kettle and saucepans. 

Now, with the sun newly risen and the mist lifting, 
they could see the city of tents that stretched in every 
direction. They made their way slowly through the 
rows, staring eagerly around. It was only just 
dawning on Harry how many witches and wizards 



Page | 89 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




there must be in the world; he had never really 
thought much about those in other countries. 

Their fellow campers were starting to wake up. First 
to stir were the families with small children; Harry 
had never seen witches and wizards this young 
before. A tiny boy no older than two was crouched 
outside a large pyramid-shaped tent, holding a wand 
and poking happily at a slug in the grass, which was 
swelling slowly to the size of a salami. As they drew 
level with him, his mother came hurrying out of the 
tent. 

“ How ma.ny times, Kevin? You don’t — touch — 
Daddy’s — wand — yecchh!” 

She had trodden on the giant slug, which burst. Her 
scolding carried after them on the still air, mingling 
with the little boy’s yells — “You bust slug! You bust 
slug!” 

A short way farther on, they saw two little witches, 
barely older than Kevin, who were riding toy 
broomsticks that rose only high enough for the girls’ 
toes to skim the dewy grass. A Ministry wizard had 
already spotted them; as he hurried past Harry, Ron, 
and Hermione he muttered distractedly, “In broad 
daylight! Parents having a lie-in, I suppose — ” 

Here and there adult wizards and witches were 
emerging from their tents and starting to cook 
breakfast. Some, with furtive looks around them, 
conjured fires with their wands; others were striking 
matches with dubious looks on their faces, as though 
sure this couldn’t work. Three African wizards sat in 
serious conversation, all of them wearing long white 
robes and roasting what looked like a rabbit on a 
bright purple fire, while a group of middle-aged 
American witches sat gossiping happily beneath a 
Page | 90 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




spangled banner stretched between their tents that 
read: THE SALEM WITCHES’ INSTITUTE. Harry 
caught snatches of conversation in strange languages 
from the inside of tents they passed, and though he 
couldn’t understand a word, the tone of every single 
voice was excited. 

“Er — is it my eyes, or has everything gone green?” 
said Ron. 

It wasn’t just Ron’s eyes. They had walked into a 
patch of tents that were all covered with a thick 
growth of shamrocks, so that it looked as though 
small, oddly shaped hillocks had sprouted out of the 
earth. Grinning faces could be seen under those that 
had their flaps open. Then, from behind them, they 
heard their names. 

“Harry! Ron! Hermione!” 

It was Seamus Finnigan, their fellow Gryffindor fourth 
year. He was sitting in front of his own shamrock- 
covered tent, with a sandy-haired woman who had to 
be his mother, and his best friend, Dean Thomas, 
also of Gryffindor. 

“Like the decorations?” said Seamus, grinning. “The 
Ministry’s not too happy.” 

“Ah, why shouldn’t we show our colors?” said Mrs. 
Finnigan. “You should see what the Bulgarians have 
got dangling all over their tents. You’ll be supporting 
Ireland, of course?” she added, eyeing Harry, Ron, 
and Hermione beadily. When they had assured her 
that they were indeed supporting Ireland, they set off 
again, though, as Ron said, “Like we’d say anything 
else surrounded by that lot.” 



Page | 91 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I wonder what the Bulgarians have got dangling all 
over their tents?” said Hermione. 

“Let’s go and have a look,” said Harry, pointing to a 
large patch of tents upheld, where the Bulgarian flag 
— white, green, and red — was fluttering in the 
breeze. 

The tents here had not been bedecked with plant life, 
but each and every one of them had the same poster 
attached to it, a poster of a very surly face with heavy 
black eyebrows. The picture was, of course, moving, 
but all it did was blink and scowl. 

“Krum,” said Ron quietly. 

“What?” said Hermione. 

“Krum!” said Ron. “Viktor Krum, the Bulgarian 
Seeker!” 

“He looks really grumpy,” said Hermione, looking 
around at the many Krums blinking and scowling at 
them. 

“ ‘Really grumpy’?” Ron raised his eyes to the 
heavens. “Who cares what he looks like? He’s 
unbelievable. He’s really young too. Only just eighteen 
or something. He’s a genius, you wait until tonight, 
you’ll see.” 

There was already a small queue for the tap in the 
corner of the field. Harry, Ron, and Hermione joined 
it, right behind a pair of men who were having a 
heated argument. One of them was a very old wizard 
who was wearing a long flowery nightgown. The other 
was clearly a Ministry wizard; he was holding out a 
pair of pinstriped trousers and almost crying with 
exasperation. 

Page | 92 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Just put them on, Archie, there’s a good chap. You 
can’t walk around like that, the Muggle at the gate’s 
already getting suspicious — ” 

“I bought this in a Muggle shop,” said the old wizard 
stubbornly. “Muggles wear them.” 

“Muggle women wear them, Archie, not the men, they 
wear these,” said the Ministry wizard, and he 
brandished the pinstriped trousers. 

“I’m not putting them on,” said old Archie in 
indignation. “I like a healthy breeze ’round my 
privates, thanks.” 

Hermione was overcome with such a strong fit of the 
giggles at this point that she had to duck out of the 
queue and only returned when Archie had collected 
his water and moved away. 

Walking more slowly now, because of the weight of 
the water, they made their way back through the 
campsite. Here and there, they saw more familiar 
faces: other Hogwarts students with their families. 
Oliver Wood, the old captain of Harry’s House 
Quidditch team, who had just left Hogwarts, dragged 
Harry over to his parents’ tent to introduce him, and 
told him excitedly that he had just been signed to the 
Puddlemere United reserve team. Next they were 
hailed by Ernie Macmillan, a Hufflepuff fourth year, 
and a little farther on they saw Cho Chang, a very 
pretty girl who played Seeker on the Ravenclaw team. 
She waved and smiled at Harry, who slopped quite a 
lot of water down his front as he waved back. More to 
stop Ron from smirking than anything, Harry 
hurriedly pointed out a large group of teenagers 
whom he had never seen before. 



Page | 93 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Who d’you reckon they are?” he said. “They don’t go 
to Hogwarts, do they?” 



“ ’Spect they go to some foreign school,” said Ron. “I 
know there are others. Never met anyone who went to 
one, though. Bill had a penfriend at a school in Brazil 
. . . this was years and years ago . . . and he wanted to 
go on an exchange trip but Mum and Dad couldn’t 
afford it. His penfriend got all offended when he said 
he wasn’t going and sent him a cursed hat. It made 
his ears shrivel up.” 

Harry laughed but didn’t voice the amazement he felt 
at hearing about other wizarding schools. He 
supposed, now that he saw representatives of so 
many nationalities in the campsite, that he had been 
stupid never to realize that Hogwarts couldn’t be the 
only one. He glanced at Hermione, who looked utterly 
unsurprised by the information. No doubt she had 
run across the news about other wizarding schools in 
some book or other. 

“You’ve been ages,” said George when they finally got 
back to the Weasleys’ tents. 

“Met a few people,” said Ron, setting the water down. 
“You not got that fire started yet?” 

“Dad’s having fun with the matches,” said Fred. 

Mr. Weasley was having no success at all in lighting 
the fire, but it wasn’t for lack of trying. Splintered 
matches littered the ground around him, but he 
looked as though he was having the time of his life. 

“Oops!” he said as he managed to light a match and 
promptly dropped it in surprise. 



Page | 94 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Come here, Mr. Weasley,” said Hermione kindly, 
taking the box from him, and showing him how to do 
it properly. 

At last they got the fire lit, though it was at least 
another hour before it was hot enough to cook 
anything. There was plenty to watch while they 
waited, however. Their tent seemed to be pitched right 
alongside a kind of thoroughfare to the field, and 
Ministry members kept hurrying up and down it, 
greeting Mr. Weasley cordially as they passed. Mr. 
Weasley kept up a running commentary, mainly for 
Harry’s and Hermione’s benefit; his own children 
knew too much about the Ministry to be greatly 
interested. 

“That was Cuthbert Mockridge, Head of the Goblin 
Liaison Office. ... Here comes Gilbert Wimple; he’s 
with the Committee on Experimental Charms; he’s 
had those horns for awhile now. ... Hello, Arnie ... 
Arnold Peasegood, he’s an Obliviator — member of the 
Accidental Magic Reversal Squad, you know. ... and 
that’s Bode and Croaker ... they’re Unspeakables. ...” 

“They’re what?” 

“From the Department of Mysteries, top secret, no 
idea what they get up to. ...” 

At last, the fire was ready, and they had just started 
cooking eggs and sausages when Bill, Charlie, and 
Percy came strolling out of the woods toward them. 

“Just Apparated, Dad,” said Percy loudly. “Ah, 
excellent, lunch!” 

They were halfway through their plates of eggs and 
sausages when Mr. Weasley jumped to his feet, 
waving and grinning at a man who was striding 

Page | 95 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




toward them. “Aha!” he said. “The man of the 
moment! Ludo!” 

Ludo Bagman was easily the most noticeable person 
Harry had seen so far, even including old Archie in 
his flowered nightdress. He was wearing long 
Quidditch robes in thick horizontal stripes of bright 
yellow and black. An enormous picture of a wasp was 
splashed across his chest. He had the look of a 
powerfully built man gone slightly to seed; the robes 
were stretched tightly across a large belly he surely 
had not had in the days when he had played 
Quidditch for England. His nose was squashed 
(probably broken by a stray Bludger, Harry thought), 
but his round blue eyes, short blond hair, and rosy 
complexion made him look like a very overgrown 
schoolboy. 

“Ahoy there!” Bagman called happily. He was walking 
as though he had springs attached to the balls of his 
feet and was plainly in a state of wild excitement. 

“Arthur, old man,” he puffed as he reached the 
campfire, “what a day, eh? What a day! Could we 
have asked for more perfect weather? A cloudless 
night coming . . . and hardly a hiccough in the 
arrangements. ... Not much for me to do!” 

Behind him, a group of haggard-looking Ministry 
wizards rushed past, pointing at the distant evidence 
of some sort of a magical fire that was sending violet 
sparks twenty feet into the air. 

Percy hurried forward with his hand outstretched. 
Apparently his disapproval of the way Ludo Bagman 
ran his department did not prevent him from wanting 
to make a good impression. 



Page | 96 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Ah — yes,” said Mr. Weasley, grinning, “this is my 
son Percy. He’s just started at the Ministry — and 
this is Fred — no, George, sorry — that’s Fred — Bill, 
Charlie, Ron — my daughter, Ginny — and Ron’s 
friends, Hermione Granger and Harry Potter.” 

Bagman did the smallest of double takes when he 
heard Harry’s name, and his eyes performed the 
familiar flick upward to the scar on Harry’s forehead. 

“Everyone,” Mr. Weasley continued, “this is Ludo 
Bagman, you know who he is, it’s thanks to him we’ve 
got such good tickets — ” 

Bagman beamed and waved his hand as if to say it 
had been nothing. 

“Fancy a flutter on the match, Arthur?” he said 
eagerly, jingling what seemed to be a large amount of 
gold in the pockets of his yellow-and-black robes. “I’ve 
already got Roddy Pontner betting me Bulgaria will 
score first — I offered him nice odds, considering 
Ireland’s front three are the strongest I’ve seen in 
years — and little Agatha Timms has put up half 
shares in her eel farm on a week-long match.” 

“Oh ... go on then,” said Mr. Weasley. “Let’s see ... a 
Galleon on Ireland to win?” 

“A Galleon?” Ludo Bagman looked slightly 
disappointed, but recovered himself. “Very well, very 
well . . . any other takers?” 

“They’re a bit young to be gambling,” said Mr. 

Weasley. “Molly wouldn’t like — ” 

“Well bet thirty-seven Galleons, fifteen Sickles, three 
Knuts,” said Fred as he and George quickly pooled all 



Page | 97 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




their money, “that Ireland wins — but Viktor Krum 
gets the Snitch. Oh and we’ll throw in a fake wand.” 



“You don’t want to go showing Mr. Bagman rubbish 
like that — ” Percy hissed, but Bagman didn’t seem to 
think the wand was rubbish at all; on the contrary, 
his boyish face shone with excitement as he took it 
from Fred, and when the wand gave a loud squawk 
and turned into a rubber chicken, Bagman roared 
with laughter. 

“Excellent! I haven’t seen one that convincing in 
years! I’d pay five Galleons for that!” 

Percy froze in an attitude of stunned disapproval. 

“Boys,” said Mr. Weasley under his breath, “I don’t 
want you betting. ... That’s all your savings. ... Your 
mother — ” 

“Don’t be a spoilsport, Arthur!” boomed Ludo 
Bagman, rattling his pockets excitedly. “They’re old 
enough to know what they want! You reckon Ireland 
will win but Krum ’ll get the Snitch? Not a chance, 
boys, not a chance. ... I’ll give you excellent odds on 
that one. ... We’ll add five Galleons for the funny 
wand, then, shall we. ...” 

Mr. Weasley looked on helplessly as Ludo Bagman 
whipped out a notebook and quill and began jotting 
down the twins’ names. 

“Cheers,” said George, taking the slip of parchment 
Bagman handed him and tucking it away carefully. 
Bagman turned most cheerfully back to Mr. Weasley. 

“Couldn’t do me a brew, I suppose? I’m keeping an 
eye out for Barty Crouch. My Bulgarian opposite 
number’s making difficulties, and I can’t understand 

Page | 98 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




a word he’s saying. Barty’ll be able to sort it out. He 
speaks about a hundred and fifty languages.” 

“Mr. Crouch?” said Percy, suddenly abandoning his 
look of poker-stiff disapproval and positively writhing 
with excitement. “He speaks over two hundred! 
Mermish and Gobbledegook and Troll ...” 

“Anyone can speak Troll,” said Fred dismissively. “All 
you have to do is point and grunt.” 

Percy threw Fred an extremely nasty look and stoked 
the fire vigorously to bring the kettle back to the boil. 

“Any news of Bertha Jorkins yet, Ludo?” Mr. Weasley 
asked as Bagman settled himself down on the grass 
beside them all. 

“Not a dicky bird,” said Bagman comfortably. “But 
she’ll turn up. Poor old Bertha ... memory like a leaky 
cauldron and no sense of direction. Lost, you take my 
word for it. She’ll wander back into the office 
sometime in October, thinking it’s still July.” 

“You don’t think it might be time to send someone to 
look for her?” Mr. Weasley suggested tentatively as 
Percy handed Bagman his tea. 

“Barty Crouch keeps saying that,” said Bagman, his 
round eyes widening innocently, “but we really can’t 
spare anyone at the moment. Oh — talk of the devil! 
Barty!” 

A wizard had just Apparated at their fireside, and he 
could not have made more of a contrast with Ludo 
Bagman, sprawled on the grass in his old Wasp 
robes. Barty Crouch was a stiff, upright, elderly man, 
dressed in an impeccably crisp suit and tie. The 
parting in his short gray hair was almost unnaturally 
Page | 99 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




straight, and his narrow toothbrush mustache looked 
as though he trimmed it using a slide rule. His shoes 
were very highly polished. Harry could see at once 
why Percy idolized him. Percy was a great believer in 
rigidly following rules, and Mr. Crouch had complied 
with the rule about Muggle dressing so thoroughly 
that he could have passed for a bank manager; Harry 
doubted even Uncle Vernon would have spotted him 
for what he really was. 

“Pull up a bit of grass, Barty,” said Ludo brightly, 
patting the ground beside him. 

“No thank you, Ludo,” said Crouch, and there was a 
bite of impatience in his voice. “I’ve been looking for 
you everywhere. The Bulgarians are insisting we add 
another twelve seats to the Top Box.” 

“Oh is that what they’re after?” said Bagman. “I 
thought the chap was asking to borrow a pair of 
tweezers. Bit of a strong accent.” 

“Mr. Crouch!” said Percy breathlessly, sunk into a 
kind of half-bow that made him look like a 
hunchback. “Would you like a cup of tea?” 

“Oh,” said Mr. Crouch, looking over at Percy in mild 
surprise. “Yes — thank you, Weatherby.” 

Fred and George choked into their own cups. Percy, 
very pink around the ears, busied himself with the 
kettle. 

“Oh and I’ve been wanting a word with you too, 
Arthur,” said Mr. Crouch, his sharp eyes falling upon 
Mr. Weasley. “Ali Bashir’s on the warpath. He wants a 
word with you about your embargo on flying carpets.” 

Mr. Weasley heaved a deep sigh. 

Page | 100 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I sent him an owl about that just last week. If I’ve 
told him once I’ve told him a hundred times: Carpets 
are defined as a Muggle Artifact by the Registry of 
Proscribed Charmable Objects, but will he listen?” 

“I doubt it,” said Mr. Crouch, accepting a cup from 
Percy. “He’s desperate to export here.” 

“Well, they’ll never replace brooms in Britain, will 
they?” said Bagman. 

“Ali thinks there’s a niche in the market for a family 
vehicle,” said Mr. Crouch. “I remember my 
grandfather had an Axminster that could seat twelve 
— but that was before carpets were banned, of 
course.” 

He spoke as though he wanted to leave nobody in any 
doubt that all his ancestors had abided strictly by the 
law. 

“So, been keeping busy, Barty?” said Bagman 
breezily. 

“Fairly,” said Mr. Crouch dryly. “Organizing Portkeys 
across five continents is no mean feat, Ludo.” 

“I expect you’ll both be glad when this is over?” said 
Mr. Weasley. 

Ludo Bagman looked shocked. 

“Glad! Don’t know when I’ve had more fun. ... Still, 
it’s not as though we haven’t got anything to look 
forward to, eh, Barty? Eh? Plenty left to organize, eh?” 

Mr. Crouch raised his eyebrows at Bagman. 



Page | 101 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“We agreed not to make the announcement until all 
the details — ” 

“Oh details!” said Bagman, waving the word away like 
a cloud of midges. “They’ve signed, haven’t they? 
They’ve agreed, haven’t they? I bet you anything these 
kids’ll know soon enough anyway. I mean, it’s 
happening at Hogwarts — ” 

“Ludo, we need to meet the Bulgarians, you know,” 
said Mr. Crouch sharply, cutting Bagman’s remarks 
short. “Thank you for the tea, Weatherby.” 

He pushed his undrunk tea back at Percy and waited 
for Ludo to rise; Bagman struggled to his feet, 
swigging down the last of his tea, the gold in his 
pockets chinking merrily. 

“See you all later!” he said. “You’ll be up in the Top 
Box with me — I’m commentating!” He waved, Barty 
Crouch nodded curtly, and both of them 
Disapparated. 

“What’s happening at Hogwarts, Dad?” said Fred at 
once. “What were they talking about?” 

“You’ll find out soon enough,” said Mr.Weasley, 
smiling. 

“It’s classified information, until such time as the 
Ministry decides to release it,” said Percy stiffly. “Mr. 
Crouch was quite right not to disclose it.” 

“Oh shut up, Weatherby,” said Fred. 

A sense of excitement rose like a palpable cloud over 
the campsite as the afternoon wore on. By dusk, the 
still summer air itself seemed to be quivering with 
anticipation, and as darkness spread like a curtain 

Page | 102 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




over the thousands of waiting wizards, the last 
vestiges of pretence disappeared: the Ministry seemed 
to have bowed to the inevitable and stopped fighting 
the signs of blatant magic now breaking out 
everywhere. 

Salesmen were Apparating every few feet, carrying 
trays and pushing carts full of extraordinary 
merchandise. There were luminous rosettes — green 
for Ireland, red for Bulgaria — which were squealing 
the names of the players, pointed green hats 
bedecked with dancing shamrocks, Bulgarian scarves 
adorned with lions that really roared, flags from both 
countries that played their national anthems as they 
were waved; there were tiny models of Firebolts that 
really flew, and collectible figures of famous players, 
which strolled across the palm of your hand, preening 
themselves. 

“Been saving my pocket money all summer for this,” 
Ron told Harry as they and Hermione strolled through 
the salesmen, buying souvenirs. Though Ron 
purchased a dancing shamrock hat and a large green 
rosette, he also bought a small figure of Viktor Krum, 
the Bulgarian Seeker. The miniature Krum walked 
backward and forward over Ron’s hand, scowling up 
at the green rosette above him. 

“Wow, look at these!” said Harry, hurrying over to a 
cart piled high with what looked like brass 
binoculars, except that they were covered with all 
sorts of weird knobs and dials. 

“Omnioculars,” said the saleswizard eagerly. “You can 
replay action . . . slow everything down . . . and they 
flash up a play-by-play breakdown if you need it. 
Bargain — ten Galleons each.” 



Page | 103 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Wish I hadn’t bought this now,” said Ron, gesturing 
at his dancing shamrock hat and gazing longingly at 
the Omnioculars. 

“Three pairs,” said Harry firmly to the wizard. 

“No — don’t bother,” said Ron, going red. He was 
always touchy about the fact that Harry, who had 
inherited a small fortune from his parents, had much 
more money than he did. 

“You won’t be getting anything for Christmas,” Harry 
told him, thrusting Omnioculars into his and 
Hermione’s hands. “For about ten years, mind.” 

“Fair enough,” said Ron, grinning. 

“Oooh, thanks, Harry,” said Hermione. “And I’ll get us 
some programs, look — ” 

Their money bags considerably lighter, they went 
back to the tents. Bill, Charlie, and Ginny were all 
sporting green rosettes too, and Mr. Weasley was 
carrying an Irish flag. Fred and George had no 
souvenirs as they had given Bagman all their gold. 

And then a deep, booming gong sounded somewhere 
beyond the woods, and at once, green and red 
lanterns blazed into life in the trees, lighting a path to 
the field. 

“It’s time!” said Mr. Weasley, looking as excited as any 
of them. “Come on, let’s go!” 



Page | 104 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 





-4 



THE QUIDDITCH WORLD CUP 

Clutching their purchases, Mr. Weasley in the lead, 
they all hurried into the wood, following the lantern- 
lit trail. They could hear the sounds of thousands of 
people moving around them, shouts and laughter, 
snatches of singing. The atmosphere of feverish 
excitement was highly infectious; Harry couldn’t stop 
grinning. They walked through the wood for twenty 
minutes, talking and joking loudly, until at last they 
emerged on the other side and found themselves in 
the shadow of a gigantic stadium. Though Harry 
could see only a fraction of the immense gold walls 
surrounding the field, he could tell that ten 
cathedrals would fit comfortably inside it. 

“Seats a hundred thousand,” said Mr. Weasley, 
spotting the awestruck look on Harry’s face. “Ministry 
task force of five hundred have been working on it all 
year. Muggle Repelling Charms on every inch of it. 
Every time Muggles have got anywhere near here all 
year, they’ve suddenly remembered urgent 
appointments and had to dash away again . . . bless 
them,” he added fondly, leading the way toward the 
Page | 105 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




nearest entrance, which was already surrounded by a 
swarm of shouting witches and wizards. 

“Prime seats!” said the Ministry witch at the entrance 
when she checked their tickets. “Top Box! Straight 
upstairs, Arthur, and as high as you can go.” 

The stairs into the stadium were carpeted in rich 
purple. They clambered upward with the rest of the 
crowd, which slowly filtered away through doors into 
the stands to their left and right. Mr. Weasley’s party 
kept climbing, and at last they reached the top of the 
staircase and found themselves in a small box, set at 
the highest point of the stadium and situated exactly 
halfway between the golden goal posts. About twenty 
purple-and-gilt chairs stood in two rows here, and 
Harry, filing into the front seats with the Weasleys, 
looked down upon a scene the likes of which he could 
never have imagined. 

A hundred thousand witches and wizards were taking 
their places in the seats, which rose in levels around 
the long oval field. Everything was suffused with a 
mysterious golden light, which seemed to come from 
the stadium itself. The field looked smooth as velvet 
from their lofty position. At either end of the field 
stood three goal hoops, fifty feet high; right opposite 
them, almost at Harry’s eye level, was a gigantic 
blackboard. Gold writing kept dashing across it as 
though an invisible giant’s hand were scrawling upon 
the blackboard and then wiping it off again; watching 
it, Harry saw that it was flashing advertisements 
across the field. 

The Bluebottle: A Broom for All the Family — safe, 
reliable, and with Built-in Anti-Burglar Buzzer ... Mrs. 
Skower’s All-Purpose Magical Mess Remover: No Pain, 
No Stain! ... Gladrags Wizardwear — London, Paris, 
Hogsmeade ... 

Page | 106 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry tore his eyes away from the sign and looked 
over his shoulder to see who else was sharing the box 
with them. So far it was empty, except for a tiny 
creature sitting in the second from last seat at the 
end of the row behind them. The creature, whose legs 
were so short they stuck out in front of it on the 
chair, was wearing a tea towel draped like a toga, and 
it had its face hidden in its hands. Yet those long, 
batlike ears were oddly familiar. . . . 

“ Dobby ?” said Harry incredulously. 

The tiny creature looked up and stretched its fingers, 
revealing enormous brown eyes and a nose the exact 
size and shape of a large tomato. It wasn’t Dobby — it 
was, however, unmistakably a house-elf, as Harry’s 
friend Dobby had been. Harry had set Dobby free 
from his old owners, the Malfoy family. 

“Did sir just call me Dobby?” squeaked the elf 
curiously from between its fingers. Its voice was 
higher even than Dobby’s had been, a teeny, 
quivering squeak of a voice, and Harry suspected — 
though it was very hard to tell with a house-elf — that 
this one might just be female. Ron and Hermione 
spun around in their seats to look. Though they had 
heard a lot about Dobby from Harry, they had never 
actually met him. Even Mr. Weasley looked around in 
interest. 

“Sorry,” Harry told the elf, “I just thought you were 
someone I knew.” 

“But I knows Dobby too, sir!” squeaked the elf. She 
was shielding her face, as though blinded by light, 
though the Top Box was not brightly lit. “My name is 
Winky, sir — and you, sir — ” Her dark brown eyes 
widened to the size of side plates as they rested upon 
Harry’s scar. “You is surely Harry Potter!” 

Page | 107 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah, I am,” said Harry. 



“But Dobby talks of you all the time, sir!” she said, 
lowering her hands very slightly and looking 
awestruck. 

“How is he?” said Harry. “How’s freedom suiting 
him?” 

“Ah, sir,” said Winky, shaking her head, “ah sir, 
meaning no disrespect, sir, but I is not sure you did 
Dobby a favor, sir, when you is setting him free.” 

“Why?” said Harry, taken aback. “What’s wrong with 
him?” 

“Freedom is going to Dobby’s head, sir,” said Winky 
sadly. “Ideas above his station, sir. Can’t get another 
position, sir.” 

“Why not?” said Harry. 

Winky lowered her voice by a half-octave and 
whispered, “He is wanting paying for his work, sir.” 

“Paying?” said Harry blankly. “Well — why shouldn’t 
he be paid?” 

Winky looked quite horrified at the idea and closed 
her fingers slightly so that her face was half-hidden 
again. 

“House-elves is not paid, sir!” she said in a muffled 
squeak. “No, no, no. I says to Dobby, I says, go find 
yourself a nice family and settle down, Dobby. He is 
getting up to all sorts of high jinks, sir, what is 
unbecoming to a house-elf. You goes racketing 
around like this, Dobby, I says, and next thing I hear 
you’s up in front of the Department for the Regulation 
Page | 108 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




and Control of Magical Creatures, like some common 
goblin.” 

“Well, it’s about time he had a bit of fun,” said Harry. 

“House-elves is not supposed to have fun, Harry 
Potter,” said Winky firmly, from behind her hands. 
“House-elves does what they is told. I is not liking 
heights at all, Harry Potter” — she glanced toward the 
edge of the box and gulped — “but my master sends 
me to the Top Box and I comes, sir.” 

“Why’s he sent you up here, if he knows you don’t like 
heights?” said Harry, frowning. 

“Master — master wants me to save him a seat, Harry 
Potter. He is very busy,” said Winky, tilting her head 
toward the empty space beside her. “Winky is wishing 
she is back in master’s tent, Harry Potter, but Winky 
does what she is told. Winky is a good house-elf.” 

She gave the edge of the box another frightened look 
and hid her eyes completely again. Harry turned back 
to the others. 

“So that’s a house-elf?” Ron muttered. “Weird things, 
aren’t they?” 

“Dobby was weirder,” said Harry fervently. 

Ron pulled out his Omnioculars and started testing 
them, staring down into the crowd on the other side 
of the stadium. 

“Wild!” he said, twiddling the replay knob on the side. 
“I can make that old bloke down there pick his nose 
again ... and again ... and again ...” 



Page | 109 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione, meanwhile, was skimming eagerly through 
her velvet-covered, tasseled program. 



“ ‘A display from the team mascots will precede the 
match,’ ” she read aloud. 

“Oh that’s always worth watching,” said Mr. Weasley. 
“National teams bring creatures from their native 
land, you know, to put on a bit of a show.” 

The box filled gradually around them over the next 
half hour. Mr. Weasley kept shaking hands with 
people who were obviously very important wizards. 
Percy jumped to his feet so often that he looked as 
though he were trying to sit on a hedgehog. When 
Cornelius Fudge, the Minister of Magic himself, 
arrived, Percy bowed so low that his glasses fell off 
and shattered. Highly embarrassed, he repaired them 
with his wand and thereafter remained in his seat, 
throwing jealous looks at Harry, whom Cornelius 
Fudge had greeted like an old friend. They had met 
before, and Fudge shook Harry’s hand in a fatherly 
fashion, asked how he was, and introduced him to 
the wizards on either side of him. 

“Harry Potter, you know,” he told the Bulgarian 
minister loudly, who was wearing splendid robes of 
black velvet trimmed with gold and didn’t seem to 
understand a word of English. “Harry Potter ... oh 
come on now, you know who he is . . . the boy who 
survived You-Know-Who ... you do know who he is — ” 

The Bulgarian wizard suddenly spotted Harry’s scar 
and started gabbling loudly and excitedly, pointing at 
it. 

“Knew we’d get there in the end,” said Fudge wearily 
to Harry. “I’m no great shakes at languages; I need 
Barty Crouch for this sort of thing. Ah, I see his 

Page | 110 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




house-elf’s saving him a seat. ... Good job too, these 
Bulgarian blighters have been trying to cadge all the 
best places ... ah, and here’s Lucius!” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione turned quickly. Edging 
along the second row to three still-empty seats right 
behind Mr. Weasley were none other than Dobby the 
house-elf’s former owners: Lucius Malfoy; his son, 
Draco; and a woman Harry supposed must be Draco’s 
mother. 

Harry and Draco Malfoy had been enemies ever since 
their very first journey to Hogwarts. A pale boy with a 
pointed face and white-blond hair, Draco greatly 
resembled his father. His mother was blonde too; tall 
and slim, she would have been nice-looking if she 
hadn’t been wearing a look that suggested there was 
a nasty smell under her nose. 

“Ah, Fudge,” said Mr. Malfoy, holding out his hand as 
he reached the Minister of Magic. “How are you? I 
don’t think you’ve met my wife, Narcissa? Or our son, 
Draco?” 

“How do you do, how do you do?” said Fudge, smiling 
and bowing to Mrs. Malfoy. “And allow me to 
introduce you to Mr. Oblansk — Obalonsk — Mr. — 
well, he’s the Bulgarian Minister of Magic, and he 
can’t understand a word I’m saying anyway, so never 
mind. And let’s see who else — you know Arthur 
Weasley, I daresay?” 

It was a tense moment. Mr. Weasley and Mr. Malfoy 
looked at each other and Harry vividly recalled the 
last time they had come face-to-face: It had been in 
Flourish and Blotts’ bookshop, and they had had a 
fight. Mr. Malfoy’s cold gray eyes swept over Mr. 
Weasley, and then up and down the row. 



Page | 111 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Good lord, Arthur,” he said softly. “What did you 
have to sell to get seats in the Top Box? Surely your 
house wouldn’t have fetched this much?” 

Fudge, who wasn’t listening, said, “Lucius has just 
given a very generous contribution to St. Mungo’s 
Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries, Arthur. 
He’s here as my guest.” 

“How — how nice,” said Mr. Weasley, with a very 
strained smile. 

Mr. Malfoy’s eyes had returned to Hermione, who 
went slightly pink, but stared determinedly back at 
him. Harry knew exactly what was making Mr. 
Malfoy’s lip curl like that. The Malfoys prided 
themselves on being purebloods; in other words, they 
considered anyone of Muggle descent, like Hermione, 
second-class. However, under the gaze of the Minister 
of Magic, Mr. Malfoy didn’t dare say anything. He 
nodded sneeringly to Mr. Weasley and continued 
down the line to his seats. Draco shot Harry, Ron, 
and Hermione one contemptuous look, then settled 
himself between his mother and father. 

“Slimy gits,” Ron muttered as he, Harry, and 
Hermione turned to face the field again. Next 
moment, Ludo Bagman charged into the box. 

“Everyone ready?” he said, his round face gleaming 
like a great, excited Edam. “Minister — ready to go?” 

“Ready when you are, Ludo,” said Fudge comfortably. 

Ludo whipped out his wand, directed it at his own 
throat, and said “Sonorusl” and then spoke over the 
roar of sound that was now filling the packed 
stadium; his voice echoed over them, booming into 
every corner of the stands. 

Page | 112 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Ladies and gentlemen ... welcome! Welcome to the 
final of the four hundred and twenty-second 
Quidditch World Cup!” 

The spectators screamed and clapped. Thousands of 
flags waved, adding their discordant national 
anthems to the racket. The huge blackboard opposite 
them was wiped clear of its last message (Bertie Bott’s 
Every Flavor Beans — A Risk With Every Mouthfull) 
and now showed BULGARIA: 0, IRELAND: 0. 

“And now, without further ado, allow me to introduce 
... the Bulgarian National Team Mascots!” 

The right-hand side of the stands, which was a solid 
block of scarlet, roared its approval. 

“I wonder what they’ve brought,” said Mr. Weasley, 
leaning forward in his seat. “Aaah!” He suddenly 
whipped off his glasses and polished them hurriedly 
on his robes. “Veelal” 

“What are veel — ?” 

But a hundred veela were now gliding out onto the 
field, and Harry’s question was answered for him. 
Veela were women . . . the most beautiful women Harry 
had ever seen ... except that they weren’t — they 
couldn’t be — human. This puzzled Harry for a 
moment while he tried to guess what exactly they 
could be; what could make their skin shine moon- 
bright like that, or their white-gold hair fan out 
behind them without wind . . . but then the music 
started, and Harry stopped worrying about them not 
being human — in fact, he stopped worrying about 
anything at all. 

The veela had started to dance, and Harry’s mind had 
gone completely and blissfully blank. All that 

Page | 113 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




mattered in the world was that he kept watching the 
veela, because if they stopped dancing, terrible things 
would happen. ... 

And as the veela danced faster and faster, wild, half- 
formed thoughts started chasing through Harry’s 
dazed mind. He wanted to do something very 
impressive, right now. Jumping from the box into the 
stadium seemed a good idea . . . but would it be good 
enough? 

“Harry, what are you doing?” said Hermione’s voice 
from a long way off. 

The music stopped. Harry blinked. He was standing 
up, and one of his legs was resting on the wall of the 
box. Next to him, Ron was frozen in an attitude that 
looked as though he were about to dive from a 
springboard. 

Angry yells were filling the stadium. The crowd didn’t 
want the veela to go. Harry was with them; he would, 
of course, be supporting Bulgaria, and he wondered 
vaguely why he had a large green shamrock pinned to 
his chest. Ron, meanwhile, was absent-mindedly 
shredding the shamrocks on his hat. Mr. Weasley, 
smiling slightly, leaned over to Ron and tugged the 
hat out of his hands. 

“You’ll be wanting that,” he said, “once Ireland have 
had their say.” 

“Huh?” said Ron, staring openmouthed at the veela, 
who had now lined up along one side of the field. 

Hermione made a loud tutting noise. She reached up 
and pulled Harry back into his seat. “Honestlyl” she 
said. 



Page | 114 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“And now,” roared Ludo Bagman’s voice, “kindly put 
your wands in the air ... for the Irish National Team 
Mascots!” 

Next moment, what seemed to be a great green-and- 
gold comet came zooming into the stadium. It did one 
circuit of the stadium, then split into two smaller 
comets, each hurtling toward the goal posts. A 
rainbow arced suddenly across the field, connecting 
the two balls of light. The crowd oooohed and 
aaaaahed, as though at a fireworks display. Now the 
rainbow faded and the balls of light reunited and 
merged; they had formed a great shimmering 
shamrock, which rose up into the sky and began to 
soar over the stands. Something like golden rain 
seemed to be falling from it — 

“Excellent!” yelled Ron as the shamrock soared over 
them, and heavy gold coins rained from it, bouncing 
off their heads and seats. Squinting up at the 
shamrock, Harry realized that it was actually 
comprised of thousands of tiny little bearded men 
with red vests, each carrying a minute lamp of gold or 
green. 

“Leprechauns!” said Mr. Weasley over the tumultuous 
applause of the crowd, many of whom were still 
fighting and rummaging around under their chairs to 
retrieve the gold. 

“There you go,” Ron yelled happily, stuffing a fistful of 
gold coins into Harry’s hand, “for the Omnioculars! 
Now you’ve got to buy me a Christmas present, ha!” 

The great shamrock dissolved, the leprechauns 
drifted down onto the field on the opposite side from 
the veela, and settled themselves cross-legged to 
watch the match. 



Page | 115 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“And now, ladies and gentlemen, kindly welcome — 
the Bulgarian National Quidditch Team! I give you — 
Dimitrov!” 

A scarlet-clad figure on a broomstick, moving so fast 
it was blurred, shot out onto the field from an 
entrance far below, to wild applause from the 
Bulgarian supporters. 

“Ivanova!” 

A second scarlet-robed player zoomed out. 

“Zograf! Levski! Vulchanov! Volkov! Aaaaaaand — 
Krum\” 

“That’s him, that’s him!” yelled Ron, following Krum 
with his Omnioculars. Harry quickly focused his own. 

Viktor Krum was thin, dark, and sallow-skinned, with 
a large curved nose and thick black eyebrows. He 
looked like an overgrown bird of prey. It was hard to 
believe he was only eighteen. 

“And now, please greet — the Irish National Quidditch 
Team!” yelled Bagman. “Presenting — Connolly! Ryan! 
Troy! Mullet! Moran! Quigley! Aaaaaand — Lynch).” 

Seven green blurs swept onto the field; Harry spun a 
small dial on the side of his Omnioculars and slowed 
the players down enough to read the word “Firebolt” 
on each of their brooms and see their names, 
embroidered in silver, upon their backs. 

“And here, all the way from Egypt, our referee, 
acclaimed Chairwizard of the International 
Association of Quidditch, Hassan Mostafa!” 



Page | 116 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




A small and skinny wizard, completely bald but with 
a mustache to rival Uncle Vernon’s, wearing robes of 
pure gold to match the stadium, strode out onto the 
field. A silver whistle was protruding from under the 
mustache, and he was carrying a large wooden crate 
under one arm, his broomstick under the other. 

Harry spun the speed dial on his Omnioculars back 
to normal, watching closely as Mostafa mounted his 
broomstick and kicked the crate open — four balls 
burst into the air: the scarlet Quaffle, the two black 
Bludgers, and (Harry saw it for the briefest moment, 
before it sped out of sight) the minuscule, winged 
Golden Snitch. With a sharp blast on his whistle, 
Mostafa shot into the air after the balls. 

“Theeeeeeeey’re OFF!” screamed Bagman. “And it’s 
Mullet! Troy! Moran! Dimitrov! Back to Mullet! Troy! 
Levski! Moran!” 

It was Quidditch as Harry had never seen it played 
before. He was pressing his Omnioculars so hard to 
his glasses that they were cutting into the bridge of 
his nose. The speed of the players was incredible — 
the Chasers were throwing the Quaffle to one another 
so fast that Bagman only had time to say their 
names. Harry spun the slow dial on the right of his 
Omnioculars again, pressed the play-by-play button 
on the top, and he was immediately watching in slow 
motion, while glittering purple lettering flashed across 
the lenses and the noise of the crowd pounded 
against his eardrums. 

Hawkshead Attacking Formation, he read as he 
watched the three Irish Chasers zoom closely 
together, Troy in the center, slightly ahead of Mullet 
and Moran, bearing down upon the Bulgarians. 
Porskoff Ploy flashed up next, as Troy made as though 
to dart upward with the Quaffle, drawing away the 
Bulgarian Chaser Ivanova and dropping the Quaffle to 
Page | 117 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Moran. One of the Bulgarian Beaters, Volkov, swung 
hard at a passing Bludger with his small club, 
knocking it into Moran’s path; Moran ducked to avoid 
the Bludger and dropped the Quaffle; and Levski, 
soaring beneath, caught it — 

“TROY SCORES!” roared Bagman, and the stadium 
shuddered with a roar of applause and cheers. “Ten 
zero to Ireland!” 

“What?” Harry yelled, looking wildly around through 
his Omnioculars. “But Levski’s got the Quaffle!” 

“Harry, if you’re not going to watch at normal speed, 
you’re going to miss things!” shouted Hermione, who 
was dancing up and down, waving her arms in the air 
while Troy did a lap of honor around the field. Harry 
looked quickly over the top of his Omni-oculars and 
saw that the leprechauns watching from the sidelines 
had all risen into the air again and formed the great, 
glittering shamrock. Across the field, the veela were 
watching them sulkily. 

Furious with himself, Harry spun his speed dial back 
to normal as play resumed. 

Harry knew enough about Quidditch to see that the 
Irish Chasers were superb. They worked as a 
seamless team, their movements so well coordinated 
that they appeared to be reading one another’s minds 
as they positioned themselves, and the rosette on 
Harry’s chest kept squeaking their names: “Troy — 
Mullet — Moran).” And within ten minutes, Ireland had 
scored twice more, bringing their lead to thirty-zero 
and causing a thunderous tide of roars and applause 
from the green-clad supporters. 

The match became still faster, but more brutal. 

Volkov and Vulchanov, the Bulgarian Beaters, were 

Page | 118 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




whacking the Bludgers as fiercely as possible at the 
Irish Chasers, and were starting to prevent them from 
using some of their best moves; twice they were forced 
to scatter, and then, finally, Ivanova managed to 
break through their ranks; dodge the Keeper, Ryan; 
and score Bulgaria’s first goal. 

“Fingers in your ears!” bellowed Mr. Weasley as the 
veela started to dance in celebration. Harry screwed 
up his eyes too; he wanted to keep his mind on the 
game. After a few seconds, he chanced a glance at the 
field. The veela had stopped dancing, and Bulgaria 
was again in possession of the Quaffle. 

“Dimitrov! Levski! Dimitrov! Ivanova — oh I say!” 
roared Bagman. 

One hundred thousand wizards gasped as the two 
Seekers, Krum and Lynch, plummeted through the 
center of the Chasers, so fast that it looked as though 
they had just jumped from airplanes without 
parachutes. Harry followed their descent through his 
Omnioculars, squinting to see where the Snitch was 



“They’re going to crash!” screamed Hermione next to 
Harry. 

She was half right — at the very last second, Viktor 
Krum pulled out of the dive and spiraled off. Lynch, 
however, hit the ground with a dull thud that could 
be heard throughout the stadium. A huge groan rose 
from the Irish seats. 

“Fool!” moaned Mr. Weasley. “Krum was feinting!” 

“It’s time-out!” yelled Bagman’s voice, “as trained 
mediwizards hurry onto the field to examine Aidan 
Lynch!” 

Page | 119 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“He’ll be okay, he only got ploughed!” Charlie said 
reassuringly to Ginny, who was hanging over the side 
of the box, looking horror-struck. “Which is what 
Krum was after, of course. ...” 

Harry hastily pressed the replay and play-by-play 
buttons on his Omnioculars, twiddled the speed dial, 
and put them back up to his eyes. 

He watched as Krum and Lynch dived again in slow 
motion. Wronski Defensive Feint — dangerous Seeker 
diversion read the shining purple lettering across his 
lenses. He saw Krum’s face contorted with 
concentration as he pulled out of the dive just in 
time, while Lynch was flattened, and he understood 
— Krum hadn’t seen the Snitch at all, he was just 
making Lynch copy him. Harry had never seen 
anyone fly like that; Krum hardly looked as though he 
was using a broomstick at all; he moved so easily 
through the air that he looked unsupported and 
weightless. Harry turned his Omnioculars back to 
normal and focused them on Krum. He was now 
circling high above Lynch, who was being revived by 
mediwizards with cups of potion. Harry, focusing still 
more closely upon Krum’s face, saw his dark eyes 
darting all over the ground a hundred feet below. He 
was using the time while Lynch was revived to look 
for the Snitch without interference. 

Lynch got to his feet at last, to loud cheers from the 
green-clad supporters, mounted his Firebolt, and 
kicked back off into the air. His revival seemed to give 
Ireland new heart. When Mostafa blew his whistle 
again, the Chasers moved into action with a skill 
unrivaled by anything Harry had seen so far. 

After fifteen more fast and furious minutes, Ireland 
had pulled ahead by ten more goals. They were now 



Page | 120 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




leading by one hundred and thirty points to ten, and 
the game was starting to get dirtier. 

As Mullet shot toward the goal posts yet again, 
clutching the Quaffle tightly under her arm, the 
Bulgarian Keeper, Zograf, flew out to meet her. 
Whatever happened was over so quickly Harry didn’t 
catch it, but a scream of rage from the Irish crowd, 
and Mostafa’s long, shrill whistle blast, told him it 
had been a foul. 

“And Mostafa takes the Bulgarian Keeper to task for 
cobbing — excessive use of elbows!” Bagman informed 
the roaring spectators. “And — yes, it’s a penalty to 
Ireland!” 

The leprechauns, who had risen angrily into the air 
like a swarm of glittering hornets when Mullet had 
been fouled, now darted together to form the words 
“HA, HA, HA!” The veela on the other side of the field 
leapt to their feet, tossed their hair angrily, and 
started to dance again. 

As one, the Weasley boys and Harry stuffed their 
fingers into their ears, but Hermione, who hadn’t 
bothered, was soon tugging on Harry’s arm. He 
turned to look at her, and she pulled his fingers 
impatiently out of his ears. 

“Look at the referee!” she said, giggling. 

Harry looked down at the field. Hassan Mostafa had 
landed right in front of the dancing veela, and was 
acting very oddly indeed. He was flexing his muscles 
and smoothing his mustache excitedly. 

“Now, we can’t have that!” said Ludo Bagman, though 
he sounded highly amused. “Somebody slap the 
referee!” 

Page | 121 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




A mediwizard came tearing across the field, his 
fingers stuffed into his own ears, and kicked Mostafa 
hard in the shins. Mostafa seemed to come to himself; 
Harry, watching through the Omnioculars again, saw 
that he looked exceptionally embarrassed and had 
started shouting at the veela, who had stopped 
dancing and were looking mutinous. 

“And unless I’m much mistaken, Mostafa is actually 
attempting to send off the Bulgarian team mascots!” 
said Bagman’s voice. “Now there’s something we 
haven’t seen before. ... Oh this could turn nasty. ...” 

It did: The Bulgarian Beaters, Volkov and Vulchanov, 
landed on either side of Mostafa and began arguing 
furiously with him, gesticulating toward the 
leprechauns, who had now gleefully formed the words 
“HEE, HEE, HEE.” Mostafa was not impressed by the 
Bulgarians’ arguments, however; he was jabbing his 
finger into the air, clearly telling them to get flying 
again, and when they refused, he gave two short 
blasts on his whistle. 

“Two penalties for Ireland!” shouted Bagman, and the 
Bulgarian crowd howled with anger. “And Volkov and 
Vulchanov had better get back on those brooms . . . 
yes ... there they go ... and Troy takes the Quaffle ...” 

Play now reached a level of ferocity beyond anything 
they had yet seen. The Beaters on both sides were 
acting without mercy: Volkov and Vulchanov in 
particular seemed not to care whether their clubs 
made contact with Bludger or human as they swung 
them violently through the air. Dimitrov shot straight 
at Moran, who had the Quaffle, nearly knocking her 
off her broom. 

“Foul\” roared the Irish supporters as one, all 
standing up in a great wave of green. 

Page | 122 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Foul!” echoed Ludo Bagman’s magically magnified 
voice. “Dimitrov skins Moran — deliberately flying to 
collide there — and it’s got to be another penalty — 
yes, there’s the whistle!” 

The leprechauns had risen into the air again, and this 
time, they formed a giant hand, which was making a 
very rude sign indeed at the veela across the field. At 
this, the veela lost control. Instead of dancing, they 
launched themselves across the field and began 
throwing what seemed to be handfuls of fire at the 
leprechauns. Watching through his Omnioculars, 
Harry saw that they didn’t look remotely beautiful 
now. On the contrary, their faces were elongating into 
sharp, cruel-beaked bird heads, and long, scaly wings 
were bursting from their shoulders — 

“And that, boys,” yelled Mr. Weasley over the tumult 
of the crowd below, “is why you should never go for 
looks alone!” 

Ministry wizards were flooding onto the field to 
separate the veela and the leprechauns, but with little 
success; meanwhile, the pitched battle below was 
nothing to the one taking place above. Harry turned 
this way and that, staring through his Omnioculars, 
as the Quaffle changed hands with the speed of a 
bullet. 

“Levski — Dimitrov — Moran — Troy — Mullet — 
Ivanova — Moran again — Moran — MORAN 
SCORES!” 

But the cheers of the Irish supporters were barely 
heard over the shrieks of the veela, the blasts now 
issuing from the Ministry members’ wands, and the 
furious roars of the Bulgarians. The game 
recommenced immediately; now Levski had the 
Quaffle, now Dimitrov — 

Page | 123 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The Irish Beater Quigley swung heavily at a passing 
Bludger, and hit it as hard as possible toward Krum, 
who did not duck quickly enough. It hit him full in 
the face. 

There was a deafening groan from the crowd; Krum’s 
nose looked broken, there was blood everywhere, but 
Hassan Mostafa didn’t blow his whistle. He had 
become distracted, and Harry couldn’t blame him; 
one of the veela had thrown a handful of fire and set 
his broom tail alight. 

Harry wanted someone to realize that Krum was 
injured; even though he was supporting Ireland, 

Krum was the most exciting player on the field. Ron 
obviously felt the same. 

“Time-out! Ah, come on, he can’t play like that, look 
at him — ” 

“Look at Lynch 1” Harry yelled. 

For the Irish Seeker had suddenly gone into a dive, 
and Harry was quite sure that this was no Wronski 
Feint; this was the real thing. ... 

“He’s seen the Snitch!” Harry shouted. “He’s seen it! 
Look at him go!” 

Half the crowd seemed to have realized what was 
happening; the Irish supporters rose in another great 
wave of green, screaming their Seeker on . . . but Krum 
was on his tail. How he could see where he was going, 
Harry had no idea; there were flecks of blood flying 
through the air behind him, but he was drawing level 
with Lynch now as the pair of them hurtled toward 
the ground again — 

“They’re going to crash!” shrieked Hermione. 

Page | 124 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“They’re not!” roared Ron. 

“Lynch is!” yelled Harry. 

And he was right — for the second time, Lynch hit the 
ground with tremendous force and was immediately 
stampeded by a horde of angry veela. 

“The Snitch, where’s the Snitch?” bellowed Charlie, 
along the row. 

“He’s got it — Krum’s got it — it’s all over!” shouted 
Harry. 

Krum, his red robes shining with blood from his nose, 
was rising gently into the air, his fist held high, a glint 
of gold in his hand. 

The scoreboard was flashing BULGARIA: 160, 
IRELAND: 170 across the crowd, who didn’t seem to 
have realized what had happened. Then, slowly, as 
though a great jumbo jet were revving up, the 
rumbling from the Ireland supporters grew louder and 
louder and erupted into screams of delight. 

“IRELAND WINS!” Bagman shouted, who like the 
Irish, seemed to be taken aback by the sudden end of 
the match. “KRUM GETS THE SNITCH — BUT 
IRELAND WINS — good lord, I don’t think any of us 
were expecting that!” 

“What did he catch the Snitch for?” Ron bellowed, 
even as he jumped up and down, applauding with his 
hands over his head. “He ended it when Ireland were 
a hundred and sixty points ahead, the idiot!” 

“He knew they were never going to catch up!” Harry 
shouted back over all the noise, also applauding 



Page | 125 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




loudly. “The Irish Chasers were too good. ... He 
wanted to end it on his terms, that’s all. ...” 



“He was very brave, wasn’t he?” Hermione said, 
leaning forward to watch Krum land as a swarm of 
mediwizards blasted a path through the battling 
leprechauns and veela to get to him. “He looks a 
terrible mess. ...” 

Harry put his Omnioculars to his eyes again. It was 
hard to see what was happening below, because 
leprechauns were zooming delightedly all over the 
field, but he could just make out Krum, surrounded 
by mediwizards. He looked surlier than ever and 
refused to let them mop him up. His team members 
were around him, shaking their heads and looking 
dejected; a short way away, the Irish players were 
dancing gleefully in a shower of gold descending from 
their mascots. Flags were waving all over the stadium, 
the Irish national anthem blared from all sides; the 
veela were shrinking back into their usual, beautiful 
selves now, though looking dispirited and forlorn. 

“Veil, ve fought bravely,” said a gloomy voice behind 
Harry. He looked around; it was the Bulgarian 
Minister of Magic. 

“You can speak English!” said Fudge, sounding 
outraged. “And you’ve been letting me mime 
everything all day!” 

“Veil, it vos very funny,” said the Bulgarian minister, 
shrugging. 

“And as the Irish team performs a lap of honor, 
flanked by their mascots, the Quidditch World Cup 
itself is brought into the Top Box!” roared Bagman. 



Page | 126 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry’s eyes were suddenly dazzled by a blinding 
white light, as the Top Box was magically illuminated 
so that everyone in the stands could see the inside. 
Squinting toward the entrance, he saw two panting 
wizards carrying a vast golden cup into the box, 
which they handed to Cornelius Fudge, who was still 
looking very disgruntled that he’d been using sign 
language all day for nothing. 

“Let’s have a really loud hand for the gallant losers — 
Bulgaria!” Bagman shouted. 

And up the stairs into the box came the seven 
defeated Bulgarian players. The crowd below was 
applauding appreciatively; Harry could see thousands 
and thousands of Omniocular lenses flashing and 
winking in their direction. 

One by one, the Bulgarians filed between the rows of 
seats in the box, and Bagman called out the name of 
each as they shook hands with their own minister 
and then with Fudge. Krum, who was last in line, 
looked a real mess. Two black eyes were blooming 
spectacularly on his bloody face. He was still holding 
the Snitch. Harry noticed that he seemed much less 
coordinated on the ground. He was slightly duck- 
footed and distinctly round-shouldered. But when 
Krum’s name was announced, the whole stadium 
gave him a resounding, earsplitting roar. 

And then came the Irish team. Aidan Lynch was being 
supported by Moran and Connolly; the second crash 
seemed to have dazed him and his eyes looked 
strangely unfocused. But he grinned happily as Troy 
and Quigley lifted the Cup into the air and the crowd 
below thundered its approval. Harry’s hands were 
numb with clapping. 



Page | 127 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




At last, when the Irish team had left the box to 
perform another lap of honor on their brooms (Aidan 
Lynch on the back of Connolly’s, clutching hard 
around his waist and still grinning in a bemused sort 
of way), Bagman pointed his wand at his throat and 
muttered, “Quietus.” 

“They’ll be talking about this one for years,” he said 
hoarsely, “a really unexpected twist, that. ... shame it 
couldn’t have lasted longer. ... Ah yes. ... yes, I owe 
you . . . how much?” 

For Fred and George had just scrambled over the 
backs of their seats and were standing in front of 
Ludo Bagman with broad grins on their faces, their 
hands outstretched. 



Page | 128 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




9 




THE DARK MARK 

“ Don’t tell your mother you’ve been gambling,” Mr. 
Weasley implored Fred and George as they all made 
their way slowly down the purple-carpeted stairs. 

“Don’t worry, Dad,” said Fred gleefully, “we’ve got big 
plans for this money. We don’t want it confiscated.” 

Mr. Weasley looked for a moment as though he was 
going to ask what these big plans were, but seemed to 
decide, upon reflection, that he didn’t want to know. 

They were soon caught up in the crowds now flooding 
out of the stadium and back to their campsites. 
Raucous singing was borne toward them on the night 
air as they retraced their steps along the lantern-lit 
path, and leprechauns kept shooting over their heads, 
cackling and waving their lanterns. When they finally 
reached the tents, nobody felt like sleeping at all, and 
given the level of noise around them, Mr. Weasley 
agreed that they could all have one last cup of cocoa 
together before turning in. They were soon arguing 
enjoyably about the match; Mr. Weasley got drawn 

Page | 129 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



into a disagreement about cobbing with Charlie, and 
it was only when Ginny fell asleep right at the tiny 
table and spilled hot chocolate all over the floor that 
Mr. Weasley called a halt to the verbal replays and 
insisted that everyone go to bed. Hermione and Ginny 
went into the next tent, and Harry and the rest of the 
Weasleys changed into pajamas and clambered into 
their bunks. From the other side of the campsite they 
could still hear much singing and the odd echoing 
bang. 

“Oh I am glad I’m not on duty,” muttered Mr. Weasley 
sleepily. “I wouldn’t fancy having to go and tell the 
Irish they’ve got to stop celebrating.” 

Harry, who was on a top bunk above Ron, lay staring 
up at the canvas ceiling of the tent, watching the glow 
of an occasional leprechaun lantern flying overhead, 
and picturing again some of Krum’s more spectacular 
moves. He was itching to get back on his own Firebolt 
and try out the Wronski Feint. ... Somehow Oliver 
Wood had never managed to convey with all his 
wriggling diagrams what that move was supposed to 
look like. ... Harry saw himself in robes that had his 
name on the back, and imagined the sensation of 
hearing a hundred-thousand-strong crowd roar, as 
Ludo Bagman’s voice echoed throughout the stadium, 
“I give you ... PotteA.” 

Harry never knew whether or not he had actually 
dropped off to sleep — his fantasies of flying like 
Krum might well have slipped into actual dreams — 
all he knew was that, quite suddenly, Mr. Weasley 
was shouting. 

“Get up! Ron — Harry — come on now, get up, this is 
urgent!” 



Page | 130 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry sat up quickly and the top of his head hit 
canvas. 

“ ’S’ matter?” he said. 

Dimly, he could tell that something was wrong. The 
noises in the campsite had changed. The singing had 
stopped. He could hear screams, and the sound of 
people running. He slipped down from the bunk and 
reached for his clothes, but Mr. Weasley, who had 
pulled on his jeans over his own pajamas, said, “No 
time, Harry — just grab a jacket and get outside — 
quickly!” 

Harry did as he was told and hurried out of the tent, 
Ron at his heels. 

By the light of the few fires that were still burning, he 
could see people running away into the woods, fleeing 
something that was moving across the field toward 
them, something that was emitting odd flashes of 
light and noises like gunfire. Loud jeering, roars of 
laughter, and drunken yells were drifting toward 
them; then came a burst of strong green light, which 
illuminated the scene. 

A crowd of wizards, tightly packed and moving 
together with wands pointing straight upward, was 
marching slowly across the field. Harry squinted at 
them. ... They didn’t seem to have faces. ... Then he 
realized that their heads were hooded and their faces 
masked. High above them, floating along in midair, 
four struggling figures were being contorted into 
grotesque shapes. It was as though the masked 
wizards on the ground were puppeteers, and the 
people above them were marionettes operated by 
invisible strings that rose from the wands into the air. 
Two of the figures were very small. 



Page | 131 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




More wizards were joining the marching group, 
laughing and pointing up at the floating bodies. Tents 
crumpled and fell as the marching crowd swelled. 
Once or twice Harry saw one of the marchers blast a 
tent out of his way with his wand. Several caught fire. 
The screaming grew louder. 

The floating people were suddenly illuminated as they 
passed over a burning tent and Harry recognized one 
of them: Mr. Roberts, the campsite manager. The 
other three looked as though they might be his wife 
and children. One of the marchers below flipped Mrs. 
Roberts upside down with his wand; her nightdress 
fell down to reveal voluminous drawers and she 
struggled to cover herself up as the crowd below her 
screeched and hooted with glee. 

“That’s sick,” Ron muttered, watching the smallest 
Muggle child, who had begun to spin like a top, sixty 
feet above the ground, his head flopping limply from 
side to side. “That is really sick. ...” 

Hermione and Ginny came hurrying toward them, 
pulling coats over their nightdresses, with Mr. 

Weasley right behind them. At the same moment, Bill, 
Charlie, and Percy emerged from the boys’ tent, fully 
dressed, with their sleeves rolled up and their wands 
out. 

“We’re going to help the Ministry!” Mr. Weasley 
shouted over all the noise, rolling up his own sleeves. 
“You lot — get into the woods, and stick together. I’ll 
come and fetch you when we’ve sorted this out!” 

Bill, Charlie, and Percy were already sprinting away 
toward the oncoming marchers; Mr. Weasley tore 
after them. Ministry wizards were dashing from every 
direction toward the source of the trouble. The crowd 
beneath the Roberts family was coming ever closer. 
Page | 132 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“C’mon,” said Fred, grabbing Ginny’s hand and 
starting to pull her toward the wood. Harry, Ron, 
Hermione, and George followed. They all looked back 
as they reached the trees. The crowd beneath the 
Roberts family was larger than ever; they could see 
the Ministry wizards trying to get through it to the 
hooded wizards in the center, but they were having 
great difficulty. It looked as though they were scared 
to perform any spell that might make the Roberts 
family fall. 

The colored lanterns that had lit the path to the 
stadium had been extinguished. Dark figures were 
blundering through the trees; children were crying; 
anxious shouts and panicked voices were 
reverberating around them in the cold night air. 

Harry felt himself being pushed hither and thither by 
people whose faces he could not see. Then he heard 
Ron yell with pain. 

“What happened?” said Hermione anxiously, stopping 
so abruptly that Harry walked into her. “Ron, where 
are you? Oh this is stupid — lumos\” 

She illuminated her wand and directed its narrow 
beam across the path. Ron was lying sprawled on the 
ground. 

“Tripped over a tree root,” he said angrily, getting to 
his feet again. 

“Well, with feet that size, hard not to,” said a drawling 
voice from behind them. 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione turned sharply. Draco 
Malfoy was standing alone nearby, leaning against a 
tree, looking utterly relaxed. His arms folded, he 
seemed to have been watching the scene at the 
campsite through a gap in the trees. 

Page | 133 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Ron told Malfoy to do something that Harry knew he 
would never have dared say in front of Mrs. Weasley 

“Language, Weasley,” said Malfoy, his pale eyes 
glittering. “Hadn’t you better be hurrying along, now? 
You wouldn’t like her spotted, would you?” 

He nodded at Hermione, and at the same moment, a 
blast like a bomb sounded from the campsite, and a 
flash of green light momentarily lit the trees around 
them. 

“What’s that supposed to mean?” said Hermione 
defiantly. 

“Granger, they’re after Muggles,” said Malfoy. “D’you 
want to be showing off your knickers in midair? 
Because if you do, hang around ... they’re moving this 
way, and it would give us all a laugh.” 

“Hermione’s a witch,” Harry snarled. 

“Have it your own way, Potter,” said Malfoy, grinning 
maliciously. “If you think they can’t spot a Mudblood, 
stay where you are.” 

“You watch your mouth!” shouted Ron. Everybody 
present knew that “Mudblood” was a very offensive 
term for a witch or wizard of Muggle parentage. 

“Never mind, Ron,” said Hermione quickly, seizing 
Ron’s arm to restrain him as he took a step toward 
Malfoy. 

There came a bang from the other side of the trees 
that was louder than anything they had heard. 

Several people nearby screamed. Malfoy chuckled 
softly. 



Page | 134 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Scare easily, don’t they?” he said lazily. “I suppose 
your daddy told you all to hide? What’s he up to — 
trying to rescue the Muggles?” 

“Where’re your parents?” said Harry, his temper 
rising. “Out there wearing masks, are they?” 

Malfoy turned his face to Harry, still smiling. 

“Well ... if they were, I wouldn’t be likely to tell you, 
would I, Potter?” 

“Oh come on,” said Hermione, with a disgusted look 
at Malfoy, “let’s go and find the others.” 

“Keep that big bushy head down, Granger,” sneered 
Malfoy. 

“Come on,” Hermione repeated, and she pulled Harry 
and Ron up the path again. 

“I’ll bet you anything his dad is one of that masked 
lot!” said Ron hotly. 

“Well, with any luck, the Ministry will catch him!” 
said Hermione fervently. “Oh I can’t believe this. 

Where have the others got to?” 

Fred, George, and Ginny were nowhere to be seen, 
though the path was packed with plenty of other 
people, all looking nervously over their shoulders 
toward the commotion back at the campsite. A huddle 
of teenagers in pajamas was arguing vociferously a 
little way along the path. When they saw Harry, Ron, 
and Hermione, a girl with thick curly hair turned and 
said quickly, “ Ou est Madame Maxime? Nous Vavons 
perdue — ” 

“Er — what?” said Ron. 

Page | 135 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh ...” The girl who had spoken turned her back on 
him, and as they walked on they distinctly heard her 
say, “ ’Ogwarts.” 

“Beauxbatons,” muttered Hermione. 

“Sorry?” said Harry. 

“They must go to Beauxbatons,” said Hermione. “You 
know . . . Beauxbatons Academy of Magic ... I read 
about it in An Appraisal of Magical Education in 
Europe.” 

“Oh ... yeah ... right,” said Harry. 

“Fred and George can’t have gone that far,” said Ron, 
pulling out his wand, lighting it like Hermione’s, and 
squinting up the path. Harry dug in the pockets of his 
jacket for his own wand — but it wasn’t there. The 
only thing he could find was his Omnioculars. 

“Ah, no, I don’t believe it ... I’ve lost my wand!” 

“You’re kidding!” 

Ron and Hermione raised their wands high enough to 
spread the narrow beams of light farther on the 
ground; Harry looked all around him, but his wand 
was nowhere to be seen. 

“Maybe it’s back in the tent,” said Ron. 

“Maybe it fell out of your pocket when we were 
running?” Hermione suggested anxiously. 

“Yeah,” said Harry, “maybe ...” 

He usually kept his wand with him at all times in the 
wizarding world, and finding himself without it in the 

Page | 136 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




midst of a scene like this made him feel very 
vulnerable. 



A rustling noise nearby made all three of them jump. 
Winky the house-elf was fighting her way out of a 
clump of bushes nearby. She was moving in a most 
peculiar fashion, apparently with great difficulty; it 
was as though someone invisible were trying to hold 
her back. 

“There is bad wizards about!” she squeaked 
distractedly as she leaned forward and labored to 
keep running. “People high — high in the air! Winky 
is getting out of the way!” 

And she disappeared into the trees on the other side 
of the path, panting and squeaking as she fought the 
force that was restraining her. 

“What’s up with her?” said Ron, looking curiously 
after Winky. “Why can’t she run properly?” 

“Bet she didn’t ask permission to hide,” said Harry. 

He was thinking of Dobby: Every time he had tried to 
do something the Malfoys wouldn’t like, the house-elf 
had been forced to start beating himself up. 

“You know, house-elves get a very raw deal!” said 
Hermione indignantly. “It’s slavery, that’s what it is! 
That Mr. Crouch made her go up to the top of the 
stadium, and she was terrified, and he’s got her 
bewitched so she can’t even run when they start 
trampling tents! Why doesn’t anyone do something 
about it?” 

“Well, the elves are happy, aren’t they?” Ron said. 

“You heard old Winky back at the match ... ‘House- 
elves is not supposed to have fun’ ... that’s what she 
likes, being bossed around. ...” 

Page | 137 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s people like you, Ron,” Hermione began hotly, 

“who prop up rotten and unjust systems, just 
because they’re too lazy to — ” 

Another loud bang echoed from the edge of the wood. 

“Let’s just keep moving, shall we?” said Ron, and 
Harry saw him glance edgily at Hermione. Perhaps 
there was truth in what Malfoy had said; perhaps 
Hermione was in more danger than they were. They 
set off again, Harry still searching his pockets, even 
though he knew his wand wasn’t there. 

They followed the dark path deeper into the wood, 
still keeping an eye out for Fred, George, and Ginny. 
They passed a group of goblins who were cackling 
over a sack of gold that they had undoubtedly won 
betting on the match, and who seemed quite 
unperturbed by the trouble at the campsite. Farther 
still along the path, they walked into a patch of silvery 
light, and when they looked through the trees, they 
saw three tall and beautiful veela standing in a 
clearing, surrounded by a gaggle of young wizards, all 
of whom were talking very loudly. 

“I pull down about a hundred sacks of Galleons a 
year!” one of them shouted. “I’m a dragon killer for 
the Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous 
Creatures.” 

“No, you’re not!” yelled his friend. “You’re a 
dishwasher at the Leaky Cauldron. ... but I’m a 
vampire hunter, I’ve killed about ninety so far — ” 

A third young wizard, whose pimples were visible even 
by the dim, silvery light of the veela, now cut in, “I’m 
about to become the youngest ever Minister of Magic, 

I am.” 



Page | 138 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry snorted with laughter. He recognized the 
pimply wizard: His name was Stan Shunpike, and he 
was in fact a conductor on the triple-decker Knight 
Bus. He turned to tell Ron this, but Ron’s face had 
gone oddly slack, and next second Ron was yelling, 
“Did I tell you I’ve invented a broomstick that’ll reach 
Jupiter?” 

“Honestly\” said Hermione, and she and Harry 
grabbed Ron firmly by the arms, wheeled him around, 
and marched him away. By the time the sounds of 
the veela and their admirers had faded completely, 
they were in the very heart of the wood. They seemed 
to be alone now; everything was much quieter. 

Harry looked around. “I reckon we can just wait here, 
you know. Well hear anyone coming a mile off.” 

The words were hardly out of his mouth, when Ludo 
Bagman emerged from behind a tree right ahead of 
them. 

Even by the feeble light of the two wands, Harry could 
see that a great change had come over Bagman. He 
no longer looked buoyant and rosy-faced; there was 
no more spring in his step. He looked very white and 
strained. 

“Who’s that?” he said, blinking down at them, trying 
to make out their faces. “What are you doing in here, 
all alone?” 

They looked at one another, surprised. 

“Well — there’s a sort of riot going on,” said Ron. 
Bagman stared at him. 

“What?” 

Page | 139 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“At the campsite . . . some people have got hold of a 
family of Muggles. ...” 

Bagman swore loudly. 

“Damn them!” he said, looking quite distracted, and 
without another word, he Disapparated with a small 
pop\ 

“Not exactly on top of things, Mr. Bagman, is he?” 
said Hermione, frowning. 

“He was a great Beater, though,” said Ron, leading 
the way off the path into a small clearing, and sitting 
down on a patch of dry grass at the foot of a tree. 

“The Wimbourne Wasps won the league three times in 
a row while he was with them.” 

He took his small figure of Krum out of his pocket, set 
it down on the ground, and watched it walk around. 
Like the real Krum, the model was slightly duck- 
footed and round-shouldered, much less impressive 
on his splayed feet than on his broomstick. Harry was 
listening for noise from the campsite. Everything 
seemed much quieter; perhaps the riot was over. 

“I hope the others are okay,” said Hermione after a 
while. 

“They’ll be fine,” said Ron. 

“Imagine if your dad catches Lucius Malfoy,” said 
Harry, sitting down next to Ron and watching the 
small figure of Krum slouching over the fallen leaves. 
“He’s always said he’d like to get something on him.” 

“That’d wipe the smirk off old Draco’s face, all right,” 
said Ron. 



Page | 140 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Those poor Muggles, though,” said Hermione 
nervously. “What if they can’t get them down?” 

“They will,” said Ron reassuringly. “They’ll find a 
way.” 

“Mad, though, to do something like that when the 
whole Ministry of Magic’s out here tonight!” said 
Hermione. “I mean, how do they expect to get away 
with it? Do you think they’ve been drinking, or are 
they just — ” 

But she broke off abruptly and looked over her 
shoulder. Harry and Ron looked quickly around too. 

It sounded as though someone was staggering toward 
their clearing. They waited, listening to the sounds of 
the uneven steps behind the dark trees. But the 
footsteps came to a sudden halt. 

“Hello?” called Harry. 

There was silence. Harry got to his feet and peered 
around the tree. It was too dark to see very far, but he 
could sense somebody standing just beyond the range 
of his vision. 

“Who’s there?” he said. 

And then, without warning, the silence was rent by a 
voice unlike any they had heard in the wood; and it 
uttered, not a panicked shout, but what sounded like 
a spell. 

“MORSMORDREl ” 

And something vast, green, and glittering erupted 
from the patch of darkness Harry’s eyes had been 
struggling to penetrate; it flew up over the treetops 
and into the sky. 

Page | 141 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What the — ?” gasped Ron as he sprang to his feet 
again, staring up at the thing that had appeared. 

For a split second, Harry thought it was another 
leprechaun formation. Then he realized that it was a 
colossal skull, comprised of what looked like emerald 
stars, with a serpent protruding from its mouth like a 
tongue. As they watched, it rose higher and higher, 
blazing in a haze of greenish smoke, etched against 
the black sky like a new constellation. 

Suddenly, the wood all around them erupted with 
screams. Harry didn’t understand why, but the only 
possible cause was the sudden appearance of the 
skull, which had now risen high enough to illuminate 
the entire wood like some grisly neon sign. He 
scanned the darkness for the person who had 
conjured the skull, but he couldn’t see anyone. 

“Who’s there?” he called again. 

“Harry, come on, move\” Hermione had seized the 
collar of his jacket and was tugging him backward. 

“What’s the matter?” Harry said, startled to see her 
face so white and terrified. 

“It’s the Dark Mark, Harry!” Hermione moaned, 
pulling him as hard as she could. “You-Know-Who’s 
sign!” 

“Voldemort’s — ?” 

“Harry, come on!” 

Harry turned — Ron was hurriedly scooping up his 
miniature Krum — the three of them started across 
the clearing — but before they had taken a few 
hurried steps, a series of popping noises announced 

Page | 142 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the arrival of twenty wizards, appearing from thin air, 
surrounding them. 

Harry whirled around, and in an instant, he 
registered one fact: Each of these wizards had his 
wand out, and every wand was pointing right at 
himself, Ron, and Hermione. 

Without pausing to think, he yelled, “DUCK!” 

He seized the other two and pulled them down onto 
the ground. 

“STUPEFYl” roared twenty voices — there was a 
blinding series of flashes and Harry felt the hair on 
his head ripple as though a powerful wind had swept 
the clearing. Raising his head a fraction of an inch he 
saw jets of fiery red light flying over them from the 
wizards’ wands, crossing one another, bouncing off 
tree trunks, rebounding into the darkness — 

“Stop!” yelled a voice he recognized. “STOP! That’s my 
son\” 

Harry’s hair stopped blowing about. He raised his 
head a little higher. The wizard in front of him had 
lowered his wand. He rolled over and saw Mr. Weasley 
striding toward them, looking terrified. 

“Ron — Harry” — his voice sounded shaky — 
“Hermione — are you all right?” 

“Out of the way, Arthur,” said a cold, curt voice. 

It was Mr. Crouch. He and the other Ministry wizards 
were closing in on them. Harry got to his feet to face 
them. Mr. Crouch’s face was taut with rage. 



Page | 143 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Which of you did it?” he snapped, his sharp eyes 
darting between them. “Which of you conjured the 
Dark Mark?” 

“We didn’t do that!” said Harry, gesturing up at the 
skull. 

“We didn’t do anything!” said Ron, who was rubbing 
his elbow and looking indignantly at his father. “What 
did you want to attack us for?” 

“Do not lie, sir!” shouted Mr. Crouch. His wand was 
still pointing directly at Ron, and his eyes were 
popping — he looked slightly mad. “You have been 
discovered at the scene of the crime!” 

“Barty,” whispered a witch in a long woolen dressing 
gown, “they’re kids, Barty, they’d never have been 
able to — ” 

“Where did the Mark come from, you three?” said Mr. 
Weasley quickly. 

“Over there,” said Hermione shakily, pointing at the 
place where they had heard the voice. “There was 
someone behind the trees . . . they shouted words — 
an incantation — ” 

“Oh, stood over there, did they?” said Mr. Crouch, 
turning his popping eyes on Hermione now, disbelief 
etched all over his face. “Said an incantation, did 
they? You seem very well informed about how that 
Mark is summoned, missy — ” 

But none of the Ministry wizards apart from Mr. 
Crouch seemed to think it remotely likely that Harry, 
Ron, or Hermione had conjured the skull; on the 
contrary, at Hermione’s words, they had all raised 



Page | 144 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




their wands again and were pointing in the direction 
she had indicated, squinting through the dark trees. 

“We’re too late,” said the witch in the woolen dressing 
gown, shaking her head. “They’ll have Disapparated.” 

“I don’t think so,” said a wizard with a scrubby brown 
beard. It was Amos Diggory, Cedric’s father. “Our 
Stunners went right through those trees. ... There’s a 
good chance we got them. ...” 

“Amos, be careful!” said a few of the wizards 
warningly as Mr. Diggory squared his shoulders, 
raised his wand, marched across the clearing, and 
disappeared into the darkness. Hermione watched 
him vanish with her hands over her mouth. 

A few seconds later, they heard Mr. Diggory shout. 

“Yes! We got them! There’s someone here! 
Unconscious! It’s — but — blimey ...” 

“You’ve got someone?” shouted Mr. Crouch, sounding 
highly disbelieving. “Who? Who is it?” 

They heard snapping twigs, the rustling of leaves, and 
then crunching footsteps as Mr. Diggory reemerged 
from behind the trees. He was carrying a tiny, limp 
figure in his arms. Harry recognized the tea towel at 
once. It was Winky. 

Mr. Crouch did not move or speak as Mr. Diggory 
deposited his elf on the ground at his feet. The other 
Ministry wizards were all staring at Mr. Crouch. For a 
few seconds Crouch remained transfixed, his eyes 
blazing in his white face as he stared down at Winky. 
Then he appeared to come to life again. 

“This — cannot — be,” he said jerkily. “No — ” 

Page | 145 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He moved quickly around Mr. Diggory and strode off 
toward the place where he had found Winky. 



“No point, Mr. Crouch,” Mr. Diggory called after him. 
“There’s no one else there.” 

But Mr. Crouch did not seem prepared to take his 
word for it. They could hear him moving around and 
the rustling of leaves as he pushed the bushes aside, 
searching. 

“Bit embarrassing,” Mr. Diggory said grimly, looking 
down at Winky’s unconscious form. “Barty Crouch’s 
house-elf ... I mean to say ...” 

“Come off it, Amos,” said Mr. Weasley quietly, “you 
don’t seriously think it was the elf? The Dark Mark’s a 
wizard’s sign. It requires a wand.” 

“Yeah,” said Mr. Diggory, “and she had a wand.” 

“What?” said Mr. Weasley. 

“Here, look.” Mr. Diggory held up a wand and showed 
it to Mr. Weasley. “Had it in her hand. So that’s 
clause three of the Code of Wand Use broken, for a 
start. No non-human creature is permitted to carry or 
use a wand.” 

Just then there was another pop, and Ludo Bagman 
Apparated right next to Mr. Weasley. Looking 
breathless and disorientated, he spun on the spot, 
goggling upward at the emerald-green skull. 

“The Dark Mark!” he panted, almost trampling Winky 
as he turned inquiringly to his colleagues. “Who did 
it? Did you get them? Barty! What’s going on?” 



Page | 146 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mr. Crouch had returned empty-handed. His face was 
still ghostly white, and his hands and his toothbrush 
mustache were both twitching. 

“Where have you been, Barty?” said Bagman. “Why 
weren’t you at the match? Your elf was saving you a 
seat too — gulping gargoyles!” Bagman had just 
noticed Winky lying at his feet. “What happened to 
her?” 

“I have been busy, Ludo,” said Mr. Crouch, still 
talking in the same jerky fashion, barely moving his 
lips. “And my elf has been stunned.” 

“Stunned? By you lot, you mean? But why — ?” 

Comprehension dawned suddenly on Bagman’s 
round, shiny face; he looked up at the skull, down at 
Winky, and then at Mr. Crouch. 

“iVo!” he said. “Winky? Conjure the Dark Mark? She 
wouldn’t know how! She’d need a wand, for a start!” 

“And she had one,” said Mr. Diggory. “I found her 
holding one, Ludo. If it’s all right with you, Mr. 

Crouch, I think we should hear what she’s got to say 
for herself.” 

Crouch gave no sign that he had heard Mr. Diggory, 
but Mr. Diggory seemed to take his silence for assent. 
He raised his own wand, pointed it at Winky, and 
said, “Rennervatel” 

Winky stirred feebly. Her great brown eyes opened 
and she blinked several times in a bemused sort of 
way. Watched by the silent wizards, she raised herself 
shakily into a sitting position. She caught sight of Mr. 
Diggory’s feet, and slowly, tremulously, raised her 
eyes to stare up into his face; then, more slowly still, 
Page | 147 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




she looked up into the sky. Harry could see the 
floating skull reflected twice in her enormous, glassy 
eyes. She gave a gasp, looked wildly around the 
crowded clearing, and burst into terrified sobs. 

“Elf!” said Mr. Diggory sternly. “Do you know who I 
am? I’m a member of the Department for the 
Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures!” 

Winky began to rock backward and forward on the 
ground, her breath coming in sharp bursts. Harry 
was reminded forcibly of Dobby in his moments of 
terrified disobedience. 

“As you see, elf, the Dark Mark was conjured here a 
short while ago,” said Mr. Diggory. “And you were 
discovered moments later, right beneath it! An 
explanation, if you please!” 

“I — I — I is not doing it, sir!” Winky gasped. “I is not 
knowing how, sir!” 

“You were found with a wand in your hand!” barked 
Mr. Diggory, brandishing it in front of her. And as the 
wand caught the green light that was filling the 
clearing from the skull above, Harry recognized it. 

“Hey — that’s mine!” he said. 

Everyone in the clearing looked at him. 

“Excuse me?” said Mr. Diggory, incredulously. 

“That’s my wand!” said Harry. “I dropped it!” 

“You dropped it?” repeated Mr. Diggory in disbelief. 

“Is this a confession? You threw it aside after you 
conjured the Mark?” 



Page | 148 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Amos, think who you’re talking to!” said Mr. Weasley, 
very angrily. “Is Harry Potter likely to conjure the 
Dark Mark?” 

“Er — of course not,” mumbled Mr. Diggory. “Sorry ... 
carried away ...” 

“I didn’t drop it there, anyway,” said Harry, jerking 
his thumb toward the trees beneath the skull. “I 
missed it right after we got into the wood.” 

“So,” said Mr. Diggory, his eyes hardening as he 
turned to look at Winky again, cowering at his feet. 
“You found this wand, eh, elf? And you picked it up 
and thought you’d have some fun with it, did you?” 

“I is not doing magic with it, sir!” squealed Winky, 
tears streaming down the sides of her squashed and 
bulbous nose. “I is ... I is ... I is just picking it up, sir! 

I is not making the Dark Mark, sir, I is not knowing 
how!” 

“It wasn’t her!” said Hermione. She looked very 
nervous, speaking up in front of all these Ministry 
wizards, yet determined all the same. “Winky’s got a 
squeaky little voice, and the voice we heard doing the 
incantation was much deeper!” She looked around at 
Harry and Ron, appealing for their support. “It didn’t 
sound anything like Winky, did it?” 

“No,” said Harry, shaking his head. “It definitely didn’t 
sound like an elf.” 

“Yeah, it was a human voice,” said Ron. 

“Well, we’ll soon see,” growled Mr. Diggory, looking 
unimpressed. “There’s a simple way of discovering the 
last spell a wand performed, elf, did you know that?” 



Page | 149 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Winky trembled and shook her head frantically, her 
ears flapping, as Mr. Diggory raised his own wand 
again and placed it tip to tip with Harry’s. 

“ Prior Incantatol” roared Mr. Diggory. 

Harry heard Hermione gasp, horrified, as a gigantic 
serpent-tongued skull erupted from the point where 
the two wands met, but it was a mere shadow of the 
green skull high above them; it looked as though it 
were made of thick gray smoke: the ghost of a spell. 

“Deletrius\” Mr. Diggory shouted, and the smoky skull 
vanished in a wisp of smoke. 

“So,” said Mr. Diggory with a kind of savage triumph, 
looking down upon Winky, who was still shaking 
convulsively. 

“I is not doing it!” she squealed, her eyes rolling in 
terror. “I is not, I is not, I is not knowing how! I is a 
good elf, I isn’t using wands, I isn’t knowing how!” 

“ You’ve been caught red-handed, elf.” Mr. Diggory 
roared. “Caught with the guilty wand in your hand\” 

“Amos,” said Mr. Weasley loudly, “think about it ... 
precious few wizards know how to do that spell. ... 
Where would she have learned it?” 

“Perhaps Amos is suggesting,” said Mr. Crouch, cold 
anger in every syllable, “that I routinely teach my 
servants to conjure the Dark Mark?” 

There was a deeply unpleasant silence. Amos Diggory 
looked horrified. “Mr. Crouch ... not ... not at all ...” 

“You have now come very close to accusing the two 
people in this clearing who are least likely to conjure 

Page | 150 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




that Mark!” barked Mr. Crouch. “Harry Potter — and 
myself! I suppose you are familiar with the boy’s 
story, Amos?” 

“Of course — everyone knows — ” muttered Mr. 
Diggory, looking highly discomforted. 

“And I trust you remember the many proofs I have 
given, over a long career, that I despise and detest the 
Dark Arts and those who practice them?” Mr. Crouch 
shouted, his eyes bulging again. 

“Mr. Crouch, I — I never suggested you had anything 
to do with it!” Amos Diggory muttered again, now 
reddening behind his scrubby brown beard. 

“If you accuse my elf, you accuse me, Diggory!” 
shouted Mr. Crouch. “Where else would she have 
learned to conjure it?” 

“She — she might’ve picked it up anywhere — ” 

“Precisely, Amos,” said Mr. Weasley. “ She might have 
picked it up anywhere. ... Winky?” he said kindly, 
turning to the elf, but she flinched as though he too 
was shouting at her. “Where exactly did you find 
Harry’s wand?” 

Winky was twisting the hem of her tea towel so 
violently that it was fraying beneath her fingers. 

“I — I is finding it ... finding it there, sir. ...” she 
whispered, “there ... in the trees, sir. ...” 

“You see, Amos?” said Mr. Weasley. “Whoever 
conjured the Mark could have Disapparated right 
after they’d done it, leaving Harry’s wand behind. A 
clever thing to do, not using their own wand, which 
could have betrayed them. And Winky here had the 
Page | 151 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




misfortune to come across the wand moments later 
and pick it up.” 

“But then, she’d have been only a few feet away from 
the real culprit!” said Mr. Diggory impatiently. “Elf? 
Did you see anyone?” 

Winky began to tremble worse than ever. Her giant 
eyes flickered from Mr. Diggory, to Ludo Bagman, and 
onto Mr. Crouch. Then she gulped and said, “I is 
seeing no one, sir ... no one ...” 

“Amos,” said Mr. Crouch curtly, “I am fully aware 
that, in the ordinary course of events, you would want 
to take Winky into your department for questioning. I 
ask you, however, to allow me to deal with her.” 

Mr. Diggory looked as though he didn’t think much of 
this suggestion at all, but it was clear to Harry that 
Mr. Crouch was such an important member of the 
Ministry that he did not dare refuse him. 

“You may rest assured that she will be punished,” Mr. 
Crouch added coldly. 

“M-m-master ...” Winky stammered, looking up at Mr. 
Crouch, her eyes brimming with tears. “M-m-master, 
p-p-please ...” 

Mr. Crouch stared back, his face somehow 
sharpened, each line upon it more deeply etched. 
There was no pity in his gaze. 

“Winky has behaved tonight in a manner I would not 
have believed possible,” he said slowly. “I told her to 
remain in the tent. I told her to stay there while I 
went to sort out the trouble. And I find that she 
disobeyed me. This means clothes.” 



Page | 152 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“No!” shrieked Winky, prostrating herself at Mr. 
Crouch’s feet. “No, master! Not clothes, not clothes!” 

Harry knew that the only way to turn a house-elf free 
was to present it with proper garments. It was pitiful 
to see the way Winky clutched at her tea towel as she 
sobbed over Mr. Crouch’s feet. 

“But she was frightened!” Hermione burst out angrily, 
glaring at Mr. Crouch. “Your elf’s scared of heights, 
and those wizards in masks were levitating people! 

You can’t blame her for wanting to get out of their 
way!” 

Mr. Crouch took a step backward, freeing himself 
from contact with the elf, whom he was surveying as 
though she were something filthy and rotten that was 
contaminating his over-shined shoes. 

“I have no use for a house-elf who disobeys me,” he 
said coldly, looking over at Hermione. “I have no use 
for a servant who forgets what is due to her master, 
and to her master’s reputation.” 

Winky was crying so hard that her sobs echoed 
around the clearing. There was a very nasty silence, 
which was ended by Mr. Weasley, who said quietly, 
“Well, I think I’ll take my lot back to the tent, if 
nobody’s got any objections. Amos, that wand’s told 
us all it can — if Harry could have it back, please — ” 

Mr. Diggory handed Harry his wand and Harry 
pocketed it. 

“Come on, you three,” Mr. Weasley said quietly. But 
Hermione didn’t seem to want to move; her eyes were 
still upon the sobbing elf. “Hermione!” Mr. Weasley 
said, more urgently. She turned and followed Harry 
and Ron out of the clearing and off through the trees. 
Page | 153 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What’s going to happen to Winky?” said Hermione, 
the moment they had left the clearing. 

“I don’t know,” said Mr. Weasley. 

“The way they were treating her!” said Hermione 
furiously. “Mr. Diggory, calling her ‘elf’ all the time ... 
and Mr. Crouch! He knows she didn’t do it and he’s 
still going to sack her! He didn’t care how frightened 
she’d been, or how upset she was — it was like she 
wasn’t even human!” 

“Well, she’s not,” said Ron. 

Hermione rounded on him. 

“That doesn’t mean she hasn’t got feelings, Ron. It’s 
disgusting the way — ” 

“Hermione, I agree with you,” said Mr. Weasley 
quickly, beckoning her on, “but now is not the time to 
discuss elf rights. I want to get back to the tent as 
fast as we can. What happened to the others?” 

“We lost them in the dark,” said Ron. “Dad, why was 
everyone so uptight about that skull thing?” 

“I’ll explain everything back at the tent,” said Mr. 
Weasley tensely. 

But when they reached the edge of the wood, their 
progress was impeded. A large crowd of frightened- 
looking witches and wizards was congregated there, 
and when they saw Mr. Weasley coming toward them, 
many of them surged forward. 

“What’s going on in there?” 

“Who conjured it?” 

Page | 154 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Arthur — it’s not — Him?” 



“Of course it’s not Him,” said Mr. Weasley 
impatiently. “We don’t know who it was; it looks like 
they Disapparated. Now excuse me, please, I want to 
get to bed.” 

He led Harry, Ron, and Hermione through the crowd 
and back into the campsite. All was quiet now; there 
was no sign of the masked wizards, though several 
ruined tents were still smoking. 

Charlie’s head was poking out of the boys’ tent. 

“Dad, what’s going on?” he called through the dark. 
“Fred, George, and Ginny got back okay, but the 
others — ” 

“I’ve got them here,” said Mr. Weasley, bending down 
and entering the tent. Harry, Ron, and Hermione 
entered after him. 

Bill was sitting at the small kitchen table, holding a 
bedsheet to his arm, which was bleeding profusely. 
Charlie had a large rip in his shirt, and Percy was 
sporting a bloody nose. Fred, George, and Ginny 
looked unhurt, though shaken. 

“Did you get them, Dad?” said Bill sharply. “The 
person who conjured the Mark?” 

“No,” said Mr. Weasley. “We found Barty Crouch’s elf 
holding Harry’s wand, but we’re none the wiser about 
who actually conjured the Mark.” 

“What?” said Bill, Charlie, and Percy together. 

“Harry’s wand?” said Fred. 



Page | 155 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Mr. Crouch’s elf?” said Percy, sounding 
thunderstruck. 

With some assistance from Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione, Mr. Weasley explained what had happened 
in the woods. When they had finished their story, 
Percy swelled indignantly. 

“Well, Mr. Crouch is quite right to get rid of an elf like 
that!” he said. “Running away when he’d expressly 
told her not to ... embarrassing him in front of the 
whole Ministry . . . how would that have looked, if 
she’d been brought up in front of the Department for 
the Regulation and Control — ” 

“She didn’t do anything — she was just in the wrong 
place at the wrong time!” Hermione snapped at Percy, 
who looked very taken aback. Hermione had always 
got on fairly well with Percy — better, indeed, than 
any of the others. 

“Hermione, a wizard in Mr. Crouch’s position can’t 
afford a house-elf who’s going to run amok with a 
wand!” said Percy pompously, recovering himself. 

“She didn’t run amok!” shouted Hermione. “She just 
picked it up off the ground!” 

“Look, can someone just explain what that skull thing 
was?” said Ron impatiently. “It wasn’t hurting 
anyone. ... Why’s it such a big deal?” 

“I told you, it’s You-Know-Who’s symbol, Ron,” said 
Hermione, before anyone else could answer. “I read 
about it in The Rise and Fall of the Dark Arts.” 

“And it hasn’t been seen for thirteen years,” said Mr. 
Weasley quietly. “Of course people panicked ... it was 
almost like seeing You-Know-Who back again.” 

Page | 156 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I don’t get it,” said Ron, frowning. “I mean ... it’s still 
only a shape in the sky. ...” 

“Ron, You-Know-Who and his followers sent the Dark 
Mark into the air whenever they killed,” said Mr. 
Weasley. “The terror it inspired ... you have no idea, 
you’re too young. Just picture coming home and 
finding the Dark Mark hovering over your house, and 
knowing what you’re about to find inside. ...” Mr. 
Weasley winced. “Everyone’s worst fear ... the very 
worst ...” 

There was silence for a moment. Then Bill, removing 
the sheet from his arm to check on his cut, said, 

“Well, it didn’t help us tonight, whoever conjured it. It 
scared the Death Eaters away the moment they saw 
it. They all Disapparated before we’d got near enough 
to unmask any of them. We caught the Robertses 
before they hit the ground, though. They’re having 
their memories modified right now.” 

“Death Eaters?” said Harry. “What are Death Eaters?” 

“It’s what You-Know- Who’s supporters called 
themselves,” said Bill. “I think we saw what’s left of 
them tonight — the ones who managed to keep 
themselves out of Azkaban, anyway.” 

“We can’t prove it was them, Bill,” said Mr. Weasley. 
“Though it probably was,” he added hopelessly. 

“Yeah, I bet it was!” said Ron suddenly. “Dad, we met 
Draco Malfoy in the woods, and he as good as told us 
his dad was one of those nutters in masks! And we all 
know the Malfoys were right in with You-Know-Who!” 

“But what were Voldemort’s supporters — ” Harry 
began. Everybody flinched — like most of the 
wizarding world, the Weasleys always avoided saying 

Page | 157 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Voldemort’s name. “Sorry,” said Harry quickly. “What 
were You -Know- Who’s supporters up to, levitating 
Muggles? I mean, what was the point?” 

“The point?” said Mr. Weasley with a hollow laugh. 
“Harry, that’s their idea of fun. Half the Muggle 
killings back when You-Know-Who was in power were 
done for fun. I suppose they had a few drinks tonight 
and couldn’t resist reminding us all that lots of them 
are still at large. A nice little reunion for them,” he 
finished disgustedly. 

“But if they were the Death Eaters, why did they 
Disapparate when they saw the Dark Mark?” said 
Ron. “They’d have been pleased to see it, wouldn’t 
they?” 

“Use your brains, Ron,” said Bill. “If they really were 
Death Eaters, they worked very hard to keep out of 
Azkaban when You-Know-Who lost power, and told all 
sorts of lies about him forcing them to kill and torture 
people. I bet they’d be even more frightened than the 
rest of us to see him come back. They denied they’d 
ever been involved with him when he lost his powers, 
and went back to their daily lives. ... I don’t reckon 
he’d be over-pleased with them, do you?” 

“So ... whoever conjured the Dark Mark ...” said 
Hermione slowly, “were they doing it to show support 
for the Death Eaters, or to scare them away?” 

“Your guess is as good as ours, Hermione,” said Mr. 
Weasley. “But I’ll tell you this ... it was only the Death 
Eaters who ever knew how to conjure it. I’d be very 
surprised if the person who did it hadn’t been a Death 
Eater once, even if they’re not now. ... Listen, it’s very 
late, and if your mother hears what’s happened she’ll 
be worried sick. We’ll get a few more hours sleep and 
then try and get an early Portkey out of here.” 

Page | 158 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry got back into his bunk with his head buzzing. 
He knew he ought to feel exhausted: It was nearly 
three in the morning, but he felt wide-awake — wide- 
awake, and worried. 

Three days ago — it felt like much longer, but it had 
only been three days — he had awoken with his scar 
burning. And tonight, for the first time in thirteen 
years, Lord Voldemort’s mark had appeared in the 
sky. What did these things mean? 

He thought of the letter he had written to Sirius 
before leaving Privet Drive. Would Sirius have gotten 
it yet? When would he reply? Harry lay looking up at 
the canvas, but no flying fantasies came to him now 
to ease him to sleep, and it was a long time after 
Charlie’s snores filled the tent that Harry finally dozed 
off. 



Page | 159 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




10 




MAYHEM AT THE MINISTRY 

Mr. Weasley woke them after only a few hours sleep. 
He used magic to pack up the tents, and they left the 
campsite as quickly as possible, passing Mr. Roberts 
at the door of his cottage. Mr. Roberts had a strange, 
dazed look about him, and he waved them off with a 
vague “Merry Christmas.” 

“Hell be all right,” said Mr. Weasley quietly as they 
marched off onto the moor. “Sometimes, when a 
person’s memory’s modified, it makes him a bit 
disorientated for a while . . . and that was a big thing 
they had to make him forget.” 

They heard urgent voices as they approached the spot 
where the Portkeys lay, and when they reached it, 
they found a great number of witches and wizards 
gathered around Basil, the keeper of the Portkeys, all 
clamoring to get away from the campsite as quickly as 
possible. Mr. Weasley had a hurried discussion with 
Basil; they joined the queue, and were able to take an 
old rubber tire back to Stoatshead Hill before the sun 
had really risen. They walked back through Ottery St. 
Page | 160 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



Catchpole and up the damp lane toward the Burrow 
in the dawn light, talking very little because they were 
so exhausted, and thinking longingly of their 
breakfast. As they rounded the corner and the 
Burrow came into view, a cry echoed along the lane. 

“Oh thank goodness, thank goodness!” 

Mrs. Weasley, who had evidently been waiting for 
them in the front yard, came running toward them, 
still wearing her bedroom slippers, her face pale and 
strained, a rolled-up copy of the Daily Prophet 
clutched in her hand. 

“Arthur — I’ve been so worried — so worried — ” 

She flung her arms around Mr. Weasley’s neck, and 
the Daily Prophet fell out of her limp hand onto the 
ground. Looking down, Harry saw the headline: 
SCENES OF TERROR AT THE QUIDDITCH WORLD 
CUP, complete with a twinkling black-and-white 
photograph of the Dark Mark over the treetops. 

“You’re all right,” Mrs. Weasley muttered distractedly, 
releasing Mr. Weasley and staring around at them all 
with red eyes, “you’re alive. ... Oh boys ...” 

And to everybody’s surprise, she seized Fred and 
George and pulled them both into such a tight hug 
that their heads banged together. 

“ Ouch\ Mum — you’re strangling us — ” 

“I shouted at you before you left!” Mrs. Weasley said, 
starting to sob. “It’s all I’ve been thinking about! What 
if You-Know-Who had got you, and the last thing I 
ever said to you was that you didn’t get enough 
O.W.L.s? Oh Fred ... George ...” 



Page | 161 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Come on, now, Molly, we’re all perfectly okay,” said 
Mr. Weasley soothingly, prising her off the twins and 
leading her back toward the house. “Bill,” he added in 
an undertone, “pick up that paper, I want to see what 
it says. ...” 

When they were all crammed into the tiny kitchen, 
and Hermione had made Mrs. Weasley a cup of very 
strong tea, into which Mr. Weasley insisted on 
pouring a shot of Ogdens Old Firewhiskey, Bill 
handed his father the newspaper. Mr. Weasley 
scanned the front page while Percy looked over his 
shoulder. 

“I knew it,” said Mr. Weasley heavily. “Ministry 
blunders ... culprits not apprehended ... lax security ... 
Dark wizards running unchecked . . . national disgrace 
... Who wrote this? Ah ... of course ... Rita Skeeter.” 

“That woman’s got it in for the Ministry of Magic!” 
said Percy furiously. “Last week she was saying we’re 
wasting our time quibbling about cauldron thickness, 
when we should be stamping out vampires! As if it 
wasn’t specifically stated in paragraph twelve of the 
Guidelines for the Treatment of Non-Wizard Part- 
Humans — ” 

“Do us a favor, Perce,” said Bill, yawning, “and shut 
up.” 

“I’m mentioned,” said Mr. Weasley, his eyes widening 
behind his glasses as he reached the bottom of the 
Daily Prophet article. 

“Where?” spluttered Mrs. Weasley, choking on her tea 
and whiskey. “If I’d seen that, I’d have known you 
were alive!” 



Page | 162 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Not by name,” said Mr. Weasley. “Listen to this: ‘If 
the terrified wizards and witches who waited 
breathlessly for news at the edge of the wood expected 
reassurance from the Ministry of Magic, they were 
sadly disappointed. A Ministry official emerged some 
time after the appearance of the Dark Mark alleging 
that nobody had been hurt, but refusing to give any 
more information. Whether this statement will be 
enough to quash the rumors that several bodies were 
removed from the woods an hour later, remains to be 
seen.’ Oh really,” said Mr. Weasley in exasperation, 
handing the paper to Percy. “Nobody was hurt. What 
was I supposed to say? Rumors that several bodies 
were removed from the woods ... well, there certainly 
will be rumors now she’s printed that.” 

He heaved a deep sigh. “Molly, I’m going to have to go 
into the office; this is going to take some smoothing 
over.” 

“I’ll come with you, Father,” said Percy importantly. 
“Mr. Crouch will need all hands on deck. And I can 
give him my cauldron report in person.” 

He bustled out of the kitchen. Mrs. Weasley looked 
most upset. 

“Arthur, you’re supposed to be on holiday! This hasn’t 
got anything to do with your office; surely they can 
handle this without you?” 

“I’ve got to go, Molly,” said Mr. Weasley. “I’ve made 
things worse. I’ll just change into my robes and I’ll be 
off. ...” 

“Mrs. Weasley,” said Harry suddenly, unable to 
contain himself, “Hedwig hasn’t arrived with a letter 
for me, has she?” 



Page | 163 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Hedwig, dear?” said Mrs. Weasley distractedly. “No ... 
no, there hasn’t been any post at all.” 

Ron and Hermione looked curiously at Harry. With a 
meaningful look at both of them he said, “All right if I 
go and dump my stuff in your room, Ron?” 

“Yeah ... think I will too,” said Ron at once. 
“Hermione?” 

“Yes,” she said quickly, and the three of them 
marched out of the kitchen and up the stairs. 

“What’s up, Harry?” said Ron, the moment they had 
closed the door of the attic room behind them. 

“There’s something I haven’t told you,” Harry said. 

“On Saturday morning, I woke up with my scar 
hurting again.” 

Ron’s and Hermione’s reactions were almost exactly 
as Harry had imagined them back in his bedroom on 
Privet Drive. Hermione gasped and started making 
suggestions at once, mentioning a number of 
reference books, and everybody from Albus 
Dumbledore to Madam Pomfrey, the Hogwarts nurse. 
Ron simply looked dumbstruck. 

“But — he wasn’t there, was he? You-Know-Who? I 
mean — last time your scar kept hurting, he was at 
Hogwarts, wasn’t he?” 

“I’m sure he wasn’t on Privet Drive,” said Harry. “But I 
was dreaming about him . . . him and Peter — you 
know, Wormtail. I can’t remember all of it now, but 
they were plotting to kill ... someone.” 



Page | 164 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He had teetered for a moment on the verge of saying 
“me,” but couldn’t bring himself to make Hermione 
look any more horrified than she already did. 

“It was only a dream,” said Ron bracingly. “Just a 
nightmare.” 

“Yeah, but was it, though?” said Harry, turning to 
look out of the window at the brightening sky. “It’s 
weird, isn’t it? ... My scar hurts, and three days later 
the Death Eaters are on the march, and Voldemort’s 
sign’s up in the sky again.” 

“Don’t — say — his — name!” Ron hissed through 
gritted teeth. 

“And remember what Professor Trelawney said?” 

Harry went on, ignoring Ron. “At the end of last 
year?” 

Professor Trelawney was their Divination teacher at 
Hogwarts. Hermione ’s terrified look vanished as she 
let out a derisive snort. 

“Oh Harry, you aren’t going to pay attention to 
anything that old fraud says?” 

“You weren’t there,” said Harry. “You didn’t hear her. 
This time was different. I told you, she went into a 
trance — a real one. And she said the Dark Lord 
would rise again . . . greater and more terrible than ever 
before ... and he’d manage it because his servant was 
going to go back to him ... and that night Wormtail 
escaped.” 

There was a silence in which Ron fidgeted 
absentmindedly with a hole in his Chudley Cannons 
bedspread. 



Page | 165 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Why were you asking if Hedwig had come, Harry?” 
Hermione asked. “Are you expecting a letter?” 

“I told Sirius about my scar,” said Harry, shrugging. 
“I’m waiting for his answer.” 

“Good thinking!” said Ron, his expression clearing. “I 
bet Sirius ’ll know what to do!” 

“I hoped he’d get back to me quickly,” said Harry. 

“But we don’t know where Sirius is ... he could be in 
Africa or somewhere, couldn’t he?” said Hermione 
reasonably. “Hedwig’s not going to manage that 
journey in a few days.” 

“Yeah, I know,” said Harry, but there was a leaden 
feeling in his stomach as he looked out of the window 
at the Hedwig-free sky. 

“Come and have a game of Quidditch in the orchard, 
Harry,” said Ron. “Come on — three on three, Bill and 
Charlie and Fred and George will play. ... You can try 
out the Wronski Feint. ...” 

“Ron,” said Hermione, in an I-don’t-think-you’re- 
being- very- sensitive sort of voice, “Harry doesn’t want 
to play Quidditch right now. ... He’s worried, and he’s 
tired. ... We all need to go to bed. ...” 

“Yeah, I want to play Quidditch,” said Harry 
suddenly. “Hang on, I’ll get my Firebolt.” 

Hermione left the room, muttering something that 
sounded very much like “Boys.” 

k k k 



Page | 166 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Neither Mr. Weasley nor Percy was at home much 
over the following week. Both left the house each 
morning before the rest of the family got up, and 
returned well after dinner every night. 

“It’s been an absolute uproar,” Percy told them 
importantly the Sunday evening before they were due 
to return to Hogwarts. “I’ve been putting out fires all 
week. People keep sending Howlers, and of course, if 
you don’t open a Howler straight away, it explodes. 
Scorch marks all over my desk and my best quill 
reduced to cinders.” 

“Why are they all sending Howlers?” asked Ginny, 
who was mending her copy of One Thousand Magical 
Herbs and Fungi with Spellotape on the rug in front of 
the living room fire. 

“Complaining about security at the World Cup,” said 
Percy. “They want compensation for their ruined 
property. Mundungus Fletcher’s put in a claim for a 
twelve-bedroomed tent with en-suite Jacuzzi, but I’ve 
got his number. I know for a fact he was sleeping 
under a cloak propped on sticks.” 

Mrs. Weasley glanced at the grandfather clock in the 
corner. Harry liked this clock. It was completely 
useless if you wanted to know the time, but otherwise 
very informative. It had nine golden hands, and each 
of them was engraved with one of the Weasley family’s 
names. There were no numerals around the face, but 
descriptions of where each family member might be. 
“Home,” “school,” and “work” were there, but there 
was also “traveling,” “lost,” “hospital,” “prison,” and, 
in the position where the number twelve would be on 
a normal clock, “mortal peril.” 

Eight of the hands were currently pointing to the 
“home” position, but Mr. Weasley’s, which was the 

Page | 167 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




longest, was still pointing to “work.” Mrs. Weasley 
sighed. 



“Your father hasn’t had to go into the office on 
weekends since the days of You-Know-Who,” she said. 
“They’re working him far too hard. His dinner’s going 
to be mined if he doesn’t come home soon.” 

“Well, Father feels he’s got to make up for his mistake 
at the match, doesn’t he?” said Percy. “If truth be 
told, he was a tad unwise to make a public statement 
without clearing it with his Head of Department first 



“Don’t you dare blame your father for what that 
wretched Skeeter woman wrote!” said Mrs. Weasley, 
flaring up at once. 

“If Dad hadn’t said anything, old Rita would just have 
said it was disgraceful that nobody from the Ministry 
had commented,” said Bill, who was playing chess 
with Ron. “Rita Skeeter never makes anyone look 
good. Remember, she interviewed all the Gringotts’ 
Charm Breakers once, and called me ‘a long-haired 
pillock’?” 

“Well, it is a bit long, dear,” said Mrs. Weasley gently. 
“If you’d just let me — ” 

“No, Mum.” 

Rain lashed against the living room window. 

Hermione was immersed in The Standard Book of 
Spells, Grade 4, copies of which Mrs. Weasley had 
bought for her, Harry, and Ron in Diagon Alley. 
Charlie was darning a fireproof balaclava. Harry was 
polishing his Firebolt, the broomstick servicing kit 
Hermione had given him for his thirteenth birthday 
open at his feet. Fred and George were sitting in a far 
Page | 168 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




corner, quills out, talking in whispers, their heads 
bent over a piece of parchment. 

“What are you two up to?” said Mrs. Weasley sharply, 
her eyes on the twins. 

“Homework,” said Fred vaguely. 

“Don’t be ridiculous, you’re still on holiday,” said Mrs. 
Weasley. 

“Yeah, we’ve left it a bit late,” said George. 

“You’re not by any chance writing out a new order 
form, are you?” said Mrs. Weasley shrewdly. “You 
wouldn’t be thinking of restarting Weasleys’ Wizard 
Wheezes, by any chance?” 

“Now, Mum,” said Fred, looking up at her, a pained 
look on his face. “If the Hogwarts Express crashed 
tomorrow, and George and I died, how would you feel 
to know that the last thing we ever heard from you 
was an unfounded accusation?” 

Everyone laughed, even Mrs. Weasley. 

“Oh your father’s coming!” she said suddenly, looking 
up at the clock again. 

Mr. Weasley’s hand had suddenly spun from “work” 
to “traveling”; a second later it had shuddered to a 
halt on “home” with the others, and they heard him 
calling from the kitchen. 

“Coming, Arthur!” called Mrs. Weasley, hurrying out 
of the room. 



Page | 169 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




A few moments later, Mr. Weasley came into the 
warm living room carrying his dinner on a tray. He 
looked completely exhausted. 

“Well, the fat’s really in the fire now,” he told Mrs. 
Weasley as he sat down in an armchair near the 
hearth and toyed unenthusiastically with his 
somewhat shriveled cauliflower. “Rita Skeeter’s been 
ferreting around all week, looking for more Ministry 
mess-ups to report. And now she’s found out about 
poor old Bertha going missing, so that’ll be the 
headline in the Prophet tomorrow. I told Bagman he 
should have sent someone to look for her ages ago.” 

“Mr. Crouch has been saying it for weeks and weeks,” 
said Percy swiftly. 

“Crouch is very lucky Rita hasn’t found out about 
Winky,” said Mr. Weasley irritably. “There’d be a 
week’s worth of headlines in his house-elf being 
caught holding the wand that conjured the Dark 
Mark.” 

“I thought we were all agreed that that elf, while 
irresponsible, did not conjure the Mark?” said Percy 
hotly. 

“If you ask me, Mr. Crouch is very lucky no one at the 
Daily Prophet knows how mean he is to elves!” said 
Hermione angrily. 

“Now look here, Hermione!” said Percy. “A high- 
ranking Ministry official like Mr. Crouch deserves 
unswerving obedience from his servants — ” 

“His slave, you mean!” said Hermione, her voice rising 
passionately, “because he didn’t pay Winky, did he?” 



Page | 170 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I think you’d all better go upstairs and check that 
you’ve packed properly!” said Mrs. Weasley, breaking 
up the argument. “Come on now, all of you. ...” 

Harry repacked his broomstick servicing kit, put his 
Firebolt over his shoulder, and went back upstairs 
with Ron. The rain sounded even louder at the top of 
the house, accompanied by loud whistlings and 
moans from the wind, not to mention sporadic howls 
from the ghoul who lived in the attic. Pigwidgeon 
began twittering and zooming around his cage when 
they entered. The sight of the half-packed trunks 
seemed to have sent him into a frenzy of excitement. 

“Bung him some Owl Treats,” said Ron, throwing a 
packet across to Harry. “It might shut him up.” 

Harry poked a few Owl Treats through the bars of 
Pigwidgeon’s cage, then turned to his trunk. Hedwig’s 
cage stood next to it, still empty. 

“It’s been over a week,” Harry said, looking at 
Hedwig’s deserted perch. “Ron, you don’t reckon 
Sirius has been caught, do you?” 

“Nah, it would’ve been in the Daily Prophet,” said Ron. 
“The Ministry would want to show they’d caught 
someone, wouldn’t they?” 

“Yeah, I suppose. ...” 

“Look, here’s the stuff Mum got for you in Diagon 
Alley. And she’s got some gold out of your vault for 
you ... and she’s washed all your socks.” 

He heaved a pile of parcels onto Harry’s camp bed 
and dropped the money bag and a load of socks next 
to it. Harry started unwrapping the shopping. Apart 
from The Standard Book of Spells, Grade 4, by 

Page | 171 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Miranda Goshawk, he had a handful of new quills, a 
dozen rolls of parchment, and refills for his potion- 
making kit — he had been running low on spine of 
lionfish and essence of belladonna. He was just piling 
underwear into his cauldron when Ron made a loud 
noise of disgust behind him. 

“What is that supposed to be?” 

He was holding up something that looked to Harry 
like a long, maroon velvet dress. It had a moldy- 
looking lace frill at the collar and matching lace cuffs. 

There was a knock on the door, and Mrs. Weasley 
entered, carrying an armful of freshly laundered 
Hogwarts robes. 

“Here you are,” she said, sorting them into two piles. 
“Now, mind you pack them properly so they don’t 
crease.” 

“Mum, you’ve given me Ginny’s new dress,” said Ron, 
handing it out to her. 

“Of course I haven’t,” said Mrs. Weasley. “That’s for 
you. Dress robes.” 

“What?” said Ron, looking horror-struck. 

“Dress robes!” repeated Mrs. Weasley. “It says on your 
school list that you’re supposed to have dress robes 
this year ... robes for formal occasions.” 

“You’ve got to be kidding,” said Ron in disbelief. “I’m 
not wearing that, no way.” 

“Everyone wears them, Ron!” said Mrs. Weasley 
crossly. “They’re all like that! Your father’s got some 
for smart parties!” 

Page | 172 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I’ll go starkers before I put that on,” said Ron 
stubbornly. 

“Don’t be so silly,” said Mrs. Weasley. “You’ve got to 
have dress robes, they’re on your list! I got some for 
Harry too ... show him, Harry. ...” 

In some trepidation, Harry opened the last parcel on 
his camp bed. It wasn’t as bad as he had expected, 
however; his dress robes didn’t have any lace on them 
at all — in fact, they were more or less the same as 
his school ones, except that they were bottle green 
instead of black. 

“I thought they’d bring out the color of your eyes, 
dear,” said Mrs. Weasley fondly. 

“Well, they’re okay!” said Ron angrily, looking at 
Harry’s robes. “Why couldn’t I have some like that?” 

“Because ... well, I had to get yours secondhand, and 
there wasn’t a lot of choice!” said Mrs. Weasley, 
flushing. 

Harry looked away. He would willingly have split all 
the money in his Gringotts vault with the Weasleys, 
but he knew they would never take it. 

“I’m never wearing them,” Ron was saying stubbornly. 
“Never.” 

“Fine,” snapped Mrs. Weasley. “Go naked. And, Harry, 
make sure you get a picture of him. Goodness knows 
I could do with a laugh.” 

She left the room, slamming the door behind her. 
There was a funny spluttering noise from behind 
them. Pigwidgeon was choking on an overlarge Owl 
Treat. 

Page | 173 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Why is everything I own rubbish?” said Ron 
furiously, striding across the room to unstick 
Pigwidgeon’s beak. 



Page | 174 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






ABOARD THE HOGWARTS EXPRESS 

There was a definite end-of-the-holidays gloom in the 
air when Harry awoke next morning. Heavy rain was 
still splattering against the window as he got dressed 
in jeans and a sweatshirt; they would change into 
their school robes on the Hogwarts Express. 

He, Ron, Fred, and George had just reached the first- 
floor landing on their way down to breakfast, when 
Mrs. Weasley appeared at the foot of the stairs, 
looking harassed. 

“Arthur!” she called up the staircase. “Arthur! Urgent 
message from the Ministry!” 

Harry flattened himself against the wall as Mr. 
Weasley came clattering past with his robes on back- 
to-front and hurtled out of sight. When Harry and the 
others entered the kitchen, they saw Mrs. Weasley 
rummaging anxiously in the drawers — “I’ve got a 
quill here somewhere!” — and Mr. Weasley bending 
over the fire, talking to — 



Page | 175 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry shut his eyes hard and opened them again to 
make sure that they were working properly. 

Amos Diggory’s head was sitting in the middle of the 
flames like a large, bearded egg. It was talking very 
fast, completely unperturbed by the sparks flying 
around it and the flames licking its ears. 

"... Muggle neighbors heard bangs and shouting, so 
they went and called those what-d’you-call-’ems — 
please-men. Arthur, you’ve got to get over there — ” 

“Here!” said Mrs. Weasley breathlessly, pushing a 
piece of parchment, a bottle of ink, and a crumpled 
quill into Mr. Weasley’s hands. 

“ — it’s a real stroke of luck I heard about it,” said Mr. 
Diggory’s head. “I had to come into the office early to 
send a couple of owls, and I found the Improper Use 
of Magic lot all setting off — if Rita Skeeter gets hold 
of this one, Arthur — ” 

“What does Mad-Eye say happened?” asked Mr. 
Weasley, unscrewing the ink bottle, loading up his 
quill, and preparing to take notes. 

Mr. Diggory’s head rolled its eyes. “Says he heard an 
intruder in his yard. Says he was creeping toward the 
house, but was ambushed by his dustbins.” 

“What did the dustbins do?” asked Mr. Weasley, 
scribbling frantically. 

“Made one hell of a noise and fired rubbish 
everywhere, as far as I can tell,” said Mr. Diggory. 
“Apparently one of them was still rocketing around 
when the please-men turned up — ” 

Mr. Weasley groaned. 

Page | 176 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“And what about the intruder?” 



“Arthur, you know Mad-Eye,” said Mr. Diggory’s head, 
rolling its eyes again. “Someone creeping into his yard 
in the dead of night? More likely there’s a very shell- 
shocked cat wandering around somewhere, covered in 
potato peelings. But if the Improper Use of Magic lot 
get their hands on Mad-Eye, he’s had it — think of 
his record — we’ve got to get him off on a minor 
charge, something in your department — what are 
exploding dustbins worth?” 

“Might be a caution,” said Mr. Weasley, still writing 
very fast, his brow furrowed. “Mad-Eye didn’t use his 
wand? He didn’t actually attack anyone?” 

“I’ll bet he leapt out of bed and started jinxing 
everything he could reach through the window,” said 
Mr. Diggory, “but they’ll have a job proving it, there 
aren’t any casualties.” 

“All right, I’m off,” Mr. Weasley said, and he stuffed 
the parchment with his notes on it into his pocket 
and dashed out of the kitchen again. 

Mr. Diggory’s head looked around at Mrs. Weasley. 

“Sorry about this, Molly,” it said, more calmly, 
“bothering you so early and everything . . . but Arthur’s 
the only one who can get Mad-Eye off, and Mad-Eye’s 
supposed to be starting his new job today. Why he 
had to choose last night ...” 

“Never mind, Amos,” said Mrs. Weasley. “Sure you 
won’t have a bit of toast or anything before you go?” 

“Oh go on, then,” said Mr. Diggory. 



Page | 177 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mrs. Weasley took a piece of buttered toast from a 
stack on the kitchen table, put it into the fire tongs, 
and transferred it into Mr. Diggory’s mouth. 

“Fanks,” he said in a muffled voice, and then, with a 
small pop, vanished. 

Harry could hear Mr. Weasley calling hurried good- 
byes to Bill, Charlie, Percy, and the girls. Within five 
minutes, he was back in the kitchen, his robes on the 
right way now, dragging a comb through his hair. 

“I’d better hurry — you have a good term, boys,” said 
Mr. Weasley to Harry, Ron, and the twins, fastening a 
cloak over his shoulders and preparing to 
Disapparate. “Molly, are you going to be all right 
taking the kids to King’s Cross?” 

“Of course I will,” she said. “You just look after Mad- 
Eye, we’ll be fine.” 

As Mr. Weasley vanished, Bill and Charlie entered the 
kitchen. 

“Did someone say Mad-Eye?” Bill asked. “What’s he 
been up to now? 

“He says someone tried to break into his house last 
night,” said Mrs. Weasley. 

“Mad-Eye Moody?” said George thoughtfully, 
spreading marmalade on his toast. “Isn’t he that 
nutter — ” 

“Your father thinks very highly of Mad-Eye Moody,” 
said Mrs. Weasley sternly. 



Page | 178 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah, well, Dad collects plugs, doesn’t he?” said Fred 
quietly as Mrs. Weasley left the room. “Birds of a 
feather ...” 

“Moody was a great wizard in his time,” said Bill. 

“He’s an old friend of Dumbledore’s, isn’t he?” said 
Charlie. 

“Dumbledore’s not what you’d call normal, though, is 
he?” said Fred. “I mean, I know he’s a genius and 
everything ...” 

“Who is Mad-Eye?” asked Harry. 

“He’s retired, used to work at the Ministry,” said 
Charlie. “I met him once when Dad took me into work 
with him. He was an Auror — one of the best ... a 
Dark wizard catcher,” he added, seeing Harry’s blank 
look. “Half the cells in Azkaban are full because of 
him. He made himself loads of enemies, though ... the 
families of people he caught, mainly . . . and I heard 
he’s been getting really paranoid in his old age. 
Doesn’t trust anyone anymore. Sees Dark wizards 
everywhere.” 

Bill and Charlie decided to come and see everyone off 
at King’s Cross station, but Percy, apologizing most 
profusely, said that he really needed to get to work. 

“I just can’t justify taking more time off at the 
moment,” he told them. “Mr. Crouch is really starting 
to rely on me.” 

“Yeah, you know what, Percy?” said George seriously. 
“I reckon he’ll know your name soon.” 



Page | 179 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mrs. Weasley had braved the telephone in the village 
post office to order three ordinary Muggle taxis to take 
them into London. 



“Arthur tried to borrow Ministry cars for us,” Mrs. 
Weasley whispered to Harry as they stood in the rain- 
washed yard, watching the taxi drivers heaving six 
heavy Hogwarts trunks into their cars. “But there 
weren’t any to spare. ... Oh dear, they don’t look 
happy, do they?” 

Harry didn’t like to tell Mrs. Weasley that Muggle taxi 
drivers rarely transported overexcited owls, and 
Pigwidgeon was making an earsplitting racket. Nor 
did it help that a number of Filibuster’s Fabulous 
Wet-Start, No-Heat Fireworks went off unexpectedly 
when Fred’s trunk sprang open, causing the driver 
carrying it to yell with fright and pain as Crookshanks 
clawed his way up the man’s leg. 

The journey was uncomfortable, owing to the fact that 
they were jammed in the back of the taxis with their 
trunks. Crookshanks took quite a while to recover 
from the fireworks, and by the time they entered 
London, Harry, Ron, and Hermione were all severely 
scratched. They were very relieved to get out at King’s 
Cross, even though the rain was coming down harder 
than ever, and they got soaked carrying their trunks 
across the busy road and into the station. 

Harry was used to getting onto platform nine and 
three-quarters by now. It was a simple matter of 
walking straight through the apparently solid barrier 
dividing platforms nine and ten. The only tricky part 
was doing this in an unobtrusive way, so as to avoid 
attracting Muggle attention. They did it in groups 
today; Harry, Ron, and Hermione (the most 
conspicuous, since they were accompanied by 
Pigwidgeon and Crookshanks) went first; they leaned 
Page | 180 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




casually against the barrier, chatting unconcernedly, 
and slid sideways through it ... and as they did so, 
platform nine and three-quarters materialized in front 
of them. 

The Hogwarts Express, a gleaming scarlet steam 
engine, was already there, clouds of steam billowing 
from it, through which the many Hogwarts students 
and parents on the platform appeared like dark 
ghosts. Pigwidgeon became noisier than ever in 
response to the hooting of many owls through the 
mist. Harry, Ron, and Hermione set off to find seats, 
and were soon stowing their luggage in a 
compartment halfway along the train. They then 
hopped back down onto the platform to say good-bye 
to Mrs. Weasley, Bill, and Charlie. 

“I might be seeing you all sooner than you think,” 
said Charlie, grinning, as he hugged Ginny good-bye. 

“Why?” said Fred keenly. 

“You’ll see,” said Charlie. “Just don’t tell Percy I 
mentioned it ... it’s ‘classified information, until such 
time as the Ministry sees fit to release it,’ after all.” 

“Yeah, I sort of wish I were back at Hogwarts this 
year,” said Bill, hands in his pockets, looking almost 
wistfully at the train. 

“Why?” said George impatiently. 

“You’re going to have an interesting year,” said Bill, 
his eyes twinkling. “I might even get time off to come 
and watch a bit of it. ...” 

“A bit of what?” said Ron. 



Page | 181 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But at that moment, the whistle blew, and Mrs. 
Weasley chivvied them toward the train doors. 

“Thanks for having us to stay, Mrs. Weasley,” said 
Hermione as they climbed on board, closed the door, 
and leaned out of the window to talk to her. 

“Yeah, thanks for everything, Mrs. Weasley,” said 
Harry. 

“Oh it was my pleasure, dears,” said Mrs. Weasley. 
“Td invite you for Christmas, but ... well, I expect 
you’re all going to want to stay at Hogwarts, what 
with ... one thing and another.” 

“Mum!” said Ron irritably. “What d’you three know 
that we don’t?” 

“You’ll find out this evening, I expect,” said Mrs. 
Weasley, smiling. “It’s going to be very exciting — 
mind you, I’m very glad they’ve changed the rules — ” 

“What rules?” said Harry, Ron, Fred, and George 
together. 

“I’m sure Professor Dumbledore will tell you. ... Now, 
behave, won’t you? Won’t you, Fred? And you, 
George?” 

The pistons hissed loudly and the train began to 
move. 

“Tell us what’s happening at Hogwarts!” Fred 
bellowed out of the window as Mrs. Weasley, Bill, and 
Charlie sped away from them. “What rules are they 
changing?” 



Page | 182 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But Mrs. Weasley only smiled and waved. Before the 
train had rounded the corner, she, Bill, and Charlie 
had Disapparated. 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione went back to their 
compartment. The thick rain splattering the windows 
made it very difficult to see out of them. Ron undid 
his trunk, pulled out his maroon dress robes, and 
flung them over Pigwidgeon’s cage to muffle his 
hooting. 

“Bagman wanted to tell us what’s happening at 
Hogwarts,” he said grumpily, sitting down next to 
Harry. “At the World Cup, remember? But my own 
mother won’t say. Wonder what — ” 

“Shh!” Hermione whispered suddenly, pressing her 
finger to her lips and pointing toward the 
compartment next to theirs. Harry and Ron listened, 
and heard a familiar drawling voice drifting in 
through the open door. 

"... Father actually considered sending me to 
Durmstrang rather than Hogwarts, you know. He 
knows the headmaster, you see. Well, you know his 
opinion of Dumbledore — the man’s such a 
Mudblood-lover — and Durmstrang doesn’t admit 
that sort of riffraff. But Mother didn’t like the idea of 
me going to school so far away. Father says 
Durmstrang takes a far more sensible line than 
Hogwarts about the Dark Arts. Durmstrang students 
actually learn them, not just the defense rubbish we 
do. ...” 

Hermione got up, tiptoed to the compartment door, 
and slid it shut, blocking out Malfoy’s voice. 



Page | 183 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“So he thinks Durmstrang would have suited him, 
does he?” she said angrily. “I wish he had gone, then 
we wouldn’t have to put up with him.” 

“Durmstrang’s another wizarding school?” said Harry. 

“Yes,” said Hermione sniffily, “and it’s got a horrible 
reputation. According to An Appraisal of Magical 
Education in Europe, it puts a lot of emphasis on the 
Dark Arts.” 

“I think I’ve heard of it,” said Ron vaguely. “Where is 
it? What country?” 

“Well, nobody knows, do they?” said Hermione, 
raising her eyebrows. 

“Er — why not?” said Harry. 

“There’s traditionally been a lot of rivalry between all 
the magic schools. Durmstrang and Beauxbatons like 
to conceal their whereabouts so nobody can steal 
their secrets,” said Hermione matter-of-factly. 

“Come off it,” said Ron, starting to laugh. 
“Durmstrang’s got to be about the same size as 
Hogwarts — how are you going to hide a great big 
castle?” 

“But Hogwarts is hidden,” said Hermione, in surprise. 
“Everyone knows that ... well, everyone who’s read 
Hogwarts, A History, anyway.” 

“Just you, then,” said Ron. “So go on — how d’you 
hide a place like Hogwarts?” 

“It’s bewitched,” said Hermione. “If a Muggle looks at 
it, all they see is a moldering old ruin with a sign over 



Page | 184 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the entrance saying DANGER, DO NOT ENTER, 
UNSAFE.” 

“So Durmstrangll just look like a min to an outsider 
too?” 

“Maybe,” said Hermione, shrugging, “or it might have 
Muggle-repelling charms on it, like the World Cup 
stadium. And to keep foreign wizards from finding it, 
they’ll have made it Unplottable — ” 

“Come again?” 

“Well, you can enchant a building so it’s impossible to 
plot on a map, can’t you?” 

“Er ... if you say so,” said Harry. 

“But I think Durmstrang must be somewhere in the 
far north,” said Hermione thoughtfully. “Somewhere 
very cold, because they’ve got fur capes as part of 
their uniforms.” 

“Ah, think of the possibilities,” said Ron dreamily. “It 
would’ve been so easy to push Malfoy off a glacier and 
make it look like an accident. ... Shame his mother 
likes him. ...” 

The rain became heavier and heavier as the train 
moved farther north. The sky was so dark and the 
windows so steamy that the lanterns were lit by 
midday. The lunch trolley came rattling along the 
corridor, and Harry bought a large stack of Cauldron 
Cakes for them to share. 

Several of their friends looked in on them as the 
afternoon progressed, including Seamus Finnigan, 
Dean Thomas, and Neville Longbottom, a round- 
faced, extremely forgetful boy who had been brought 

Page | 185 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




up by his formidable witch of a grandmother. Seamus 
was still wearing his Ireland rosette. Some of its 
magic seemed to be wearing off now; it was still 
squeaking “ Troy — Mullet — Moran\” but in a very 
feeble and exhausted sort of way. After half an hour 
or so, Hermione, growing tired of the endless 
Quidditch talk, buried herself once more in The 
Standard Book of Spells, Grade 4, and started trying 
to learn a Summoning Charm. 

Neville listened jealously to the others’ conversation 
as they relived the Cup match. 

“Gran didn’t want to go,” he said miserably. “Wouldn’t 
buy tickets. It sounded amazing though.” 

“It was,” said Ron. “Look at this, Neville. ...” 

He rummaged in his trunk up in the luggage rack and 
pulled out the miniature figure of Viktor Krum. 

“Oh wow,” said Neville enviously as Ron tipped Krum 
onto his pudgy hand. 

“We saw him right up close, as well,” said Ron. “We 
were in the Top Box — ” 

“For the first and last time in your life, Weasley.” 

Draco Malfoy had appeared in the doorway. Behind 
him stood Crabbe and Goyle, his enormous, thuggish 
cronies, both of whom appeared to have grown at 
least a foot during the summer. Evidently they had 
overheard the conversation through the compartment 
door, which Dean and Seamus had left ajar. 

“Don’t remember asking you to join us, Malfoy,” said 
Harry coolly. 



Page | 186 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Weasley ... what is that?” said Malfoy, pointing at 
Pigwidgeon’s cage. A sleeve of Ron’s dress robes was 
dangling from it, swaying with the motion of the train, 
the moldy lace cuff very obvious. 

Ron made to stuff the robes out of sight, but Malfoy 
was too quick for him; he seized the sleeve and 
pulled. 

“Look at this!” said Malfoy in ecstasy, holding up 
Ron’s robes and showing Crabbe and Goyle, “Weasley, 
you weren’t thinking of wearing these, were you? I 
mean — they were very fashionable in about eighteen 
ninety. ...” 

“Eat dung, Malfoy!” said Ron, the same color as the 
dress robes as he snatched them back out of Malfoy’s 
grip. Malfoy howled with derisive laughter; Crabbe 
and Goyle guffawed stupidly. 

“So ... going to enter, Weasley? Going to try and bring 
a bit of glory to the family name? There’s money 
involved as well, you know ... you’d be able to afford 
some decent robes if you won. ...” 

“What are you talking about?” snapped Ron. 

“ Are you going to enter?” Malfoy repeated. “I suppose 
you will, Potter? You never miss a chance to show off, 
do you?” 

“Either explain what you’re on about or go away, 
Malfoy,” said Hermione testily, over the top of The 
Standard Book of Spells, Grade 4. 

A gleeful smile spread across Malfoy’s pale face. 

“Don’t tell me you don’t know?” he said delightedly. 
“You’ve got a father and brother at the Ministry and 

Page | 187 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




you don’t even know ? My God, my father told me 
about it ages ago ... heard it from Cornelius Fudge. 
But then, Father’s always associated with the top 
people at the Ministry. . . . Maybe your father’s too 
junior to know about it, Weasley ... yes ... they 
probably don’t talk about important stuff in front of 
him. ...” 

Laughing once more, Malfoy beckoned to Crabbe and 
Goyle, and the three of them disappeared. 

Ron got to his feet and slammed the sliding 
compartment door so hard behind them that the glass 
shattered. 

“Ronl” said Hermione reproachfully, and she pulled 
out her wand, muttered “ ReparoV ’ and the glass 
shards flew back into a single pane and back into the 
door. 

“Well ... making it look like he knows everything and 
we don’t. ...” Ron snarled. “ ‘Father’s always 
associated with the top people at the Ministry.’... Dad 
could’ve got a promotion any time ... he just likes it 
where he is. ...” 

“Of course he does,” said Hermione quietly. “Don’t let 
Malfoy get to you, Ron — ” 

“Him! Get to me!? As if!” said Ron, picking up one of 
the remaining Cauldron Cakes and squashing it into 
a pulp. 

Ron’s bad mood continued for the rest of the journey. 
He didn’t talk much as they changed into their school 
robes, and was still glowering when the Hogwarts 
Express slowed down at last and finally stopped in 
the pitch-darkness of Hogsmeade station. 



Page | 188 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




As the train doors opened, there was a rumble of 
thunder overhead. Hermione bundled up 
Crookshanks in her cloak and Ron left his dress 
robes over Pigwidgeon as they left the train, heads 
bent and eyes narrowed against the downpour. The 
rain was now coming down so thick and fast that it 
was as though buckets of ice-cold water were being 
emptied repeatedly over their heads. 

“Hi, Hagrid!” Harry yelled, seeing a gigantic silhouette 
at the far end of the platform. 

“All righ’, Harry?” Hagrid bellowed back, waving. “See 
yeh at the feast if we don’ drown!” 

First years traditionally reached Hogwarts Castle by 
sailing across the lake with Hagrid. 

“Oooh, I wouldn’t fancy crossing the lake in this 
weather,” said Hermione fervently, shivering as they 
inched slowly along the dark platform with the rest of 
the crowd. A hundred horseless carriages stood 
waiting for them outside the station. Harry, Ron, 
Hermione, and Neville climbed gratefully into one of 
them, the door shut with a snap, and a few moments 
later, with a great lurch, the long procession of 
carriages was rumbling and splashing its way up the 
track toward Hogwarts Castle. 



Page | 189 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE TRIWIZARD TOURNAMENT 

Through the gates, flanked with statues of winged 
boars, and up the sweeping drive the carriages 
trundled, swaying dangerously in what was fast 
becoming a gale. Leaning against the window, Harry 
could see Hogwarts coming nearer, its many lighted 
windows blurred and shimmering behind the thick 
curtain of rain. Lightning flashed across the sky as 
their carriage came to a halt before the great oak front 
doors, which stood at the top of a flight of stone steps. 
People who had occupied the carriages in front were 
already hurrying up the stone steps into the castle. 
Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Neville jumped down from 
their carriage and dashed up the steps too, looking up 
only when they were safely inside the cavernous, 
torch-lit entrance hall, with its magnificent marble 
staircase. 

“Blimey,” said Ron, shaking his head and sending 
water everywhere, “if that keeps up the lake’s going to 
overflow. I’m soak — ARRGH!” 



Page | 190 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



A large, red, water-filled balloon had dropped from 
out of the ceiling onto Ron’s head and exploded. 
Drenched and sputtering, Ron staggered sideways 
into Harry, just as a second water bomb dropped — 
narrowly missing Hermione, it burst at Harry’s feet, 
sending a wave of cold water over his sneakers into 
his socks. People all around them shrieked and 
started pushing one another in their efforts to get out 
of the line of fire. Harry looked up and saw, floating 
twenty feet above them, Peeves the Poltergeist, a little 
man in a bell-covered hat and orange bow tie, his 
wide, malicious face contorted with concentration as 
he took aim again. 

“PEEVES!” yelled an angry voice. “Peeves, come down 
here at ONCE!” 

Professor McGonagall, Deputy Headmistress and 
head of Gryffindor House, had come dashing out of 
the Great Hall; she skidded on the wet floor and 
grabbed Hermione around the neck to stop herself 
from falling. 

“Ouch — sorry, Miss Granger — ” 

“That’s all right, Professor!” Hermione gasped, 
massaging her throat. 

“Peeves, get down here NOW!” barked Professor 
McGonagall, straightening her pointed hat and 
glaring upward through her square-rimmed 
spectacles. 

“Not doing nothing!” cackled Peeves, lobbing a water 
bomb at several fifth-year girls, who screamed and 
dived into the Great Hall. “Already wet, aren’t they? 
Little squirts! Wheeeeeeeeee!” And he aimed another 
bomb at a group of second years who had just 
arrived. 

Page | 191 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I shall call the headmaster!” shouted Professor 
McGonagall. “I’m warning you, Peeves — ” 

Peeves stuck out his tongue, threw the last of his 
water bombs into the air, and zoomed off up the 
marble staircase, cackling insanely. 

“Well, move along, then!” said Professor McGonagall 
sharply to the bedraggled crowd. “Into the Great Hall, 
come on!” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione slipped and slid across the 
entrance hall and through the double doors on the 
right, Ron muttering furiously under his breath as he 
pushed his sopping hair off his face. 

The Great Hall looked its usual splendid self, 
decorated for the start-of-term feast. Golden plates 
and goblets gleamed by the light of hundreds and 
hundreds of candles, floating over the tables in 
midair. The four long House tables were packed with 
chattering students; at the top of the Hall, the staff 
sat along one side of a fifth table, facing their pupils. 

It was much warmer in here. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione walked past the Slytherins, the 
Ravenclaws, and the Hufflepuffs, and sat down with 
the rest of the Gryffindors at the far side of the Hall, 
next to Nearly Headless Nick, the Gryffindor ghost. 
Pearly white and semitransparent, Nick was dressed 
tonight in his usual doublet, but with a particularly 
large ruff, which served the dual purpose of looking 
extra-festive, and insuring that his head didn’t wobble 
too much on his partially severed neck. 

“Good evening,” he said, beaming at them. 

“Says who?” said Harry, taking off his sneakers and 
emptying them of water. “Hope they hurry up with the 
Sorting. I’m starving.” 

Page | 192 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The Sorting of the new students into Houses took 
place at the start of every school year, but by an 
unlucky combination of circumstances, Harry hadn’t 
been present at one since his own. He was quite 
looking forward to it. Just then, a highly excited, 
breathless voice called down the table. 

“Hiya, Harry!” 

It was Colin Creevey, a third year to whom Harry was 
something of a hero. 

“Hi, Colin,” said Harry warily. 

“Harry, guess what? Guess what, Harry? My brother’s 
starting! My brother Dennis!” 

“Er — good,” said Harry. 

“He’s really excited!” said Colin, practically bouncing 
up and down in his seat. “I just hope he’s in 
Gryffindor! Keep your fingers crossed, eh, Harry?” 

“Er — yeah, all right,” said Harry. He turned back to 
Hermione, Ron, and Nearly Headless Nick. “Brothers 
and sisters usually go in the same Houses, don’t 
they?” he said. He was judging by the Weasleys, all 
seven of whom had been put into Gryffindor. 

“Oh no, not necessarily,” said Hermione. “Parvati 
Patil’s twin’s in Ravenclaw, and they’re identical. 
You’d think they’d be together, wouldn’t you?” 

Harry looked up at the staff table. There seemed to be 
rather more empty seats there than usual. Hagrid, of 
course, was still fighting his way across the lake with 
the first years; Professor McGonagall was presumably 
supervising the drying of the entrance hall floor, but 



Page | 193 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




there was another empty chair too, and Harry 
couldn’t think who else was missing. 

“Where’s the new Defense Against the Dark Arts 
teacher?” said Hermione, who was also looking up at 
the teachers. 

They had never yet had a Defense Against the Dark 
Arts teacher who had lasted more than three terms. 
Harry’s favorite by far had been Professor Lupin, who 
had resigned last year. He looked up and down the 
staff table. There was definitely no new face there. 

“Maybe they couldn’t get anyone!” said Hermione, 
looking anxious. 

Harry scanned the table more carefully. Tiny little 
Professor Flitwick, the Charms teacher, was sitting on 
a large pile of cushions beside Professor Sprout, the 
Herbology teacher, whose hat was askew over her 
flyaway gray hair. She was talking to Professor 
Sinistra of the Astronomy department. On Professor 
Sinistra ’s other side was the sallow-faced, hook- 
nosed, greasy-haired Potions master, Snape — 

Harry’s least favorite person at Hogwarts. Harry’s 
loathing of Snape was matched only by Snape ’s 
hatred of him, a hatred which had, if possible, 
intensified last year, when Harry had helped Sirius 
escape right under Snape ’s overlarge nose — Snape 
and Sirius had been enemies since their own school 
days. 

On Snape ’s other side was an empty seat, which 
Harry guessed was Professor McGonagall’s. Next to it, 
and in the very center of the table, sat Professor 
Dumbledore, the headmaster, his sweeping silver hair 
and beard shining in the candlelight, his magnificent 
deep green robes embroidered with many stars and 
moons. The tips of Dumbledore ’s long, thin fingers 
Page | 194 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




were together and he was resting his chin upon them, 
staring up at the ceiling through his half-moon 
spectacles as though lost in thought. Harry glanced 
up at the ceiling too. It was enchanted to look like the 
sky outside, and he had never seen it look this 
stormy. Black and purple clouds were swirling across 
it, and as another thunderclap sounded outside, a 
fork of lightning flashed across it. 

“Oh hurry up,” Ron moaned, beside Harry, “I could 
eat a hippogriff.” 

The words were no sooner out of his mouth than the 
doors of the Great Hall opened and silence fell. 
Professor McGonagall was leading a long line of first 
years up to the top of the Hall. If Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione were wet, it was nothing to how these first 
years looked. They appeared to have swum across the 
lake rather than sailed. All of them were shivering 
with a combination of cold and nerves as they filed 
along the staff table and came to a halt in a line 
facing the rest of the school — all of them except the 
smallest of the lot, a boy with mousy hair, who was 
wrapped in what Harry recognized as Hagrid’s 
moleskin overcoat. The coat was so big for him that it 
looked as though he were draped in a furry black 
circus tent. His small face protruded from over the 
collar, looking almost painfully excited. When he had 
lined up with his terrified-looking peers, he caught 
Colin Creevey’s eye, gave a double thumbs-up, and 
mouthed, I fell in the lake\ He looked positively 
delighted about it. 

Professor McGonagall now placed a three-legged stool 
on the ground before the first years and, on top of it, 
an extremely old, dirty, patched wizard’s hat. The first 
years stared at it. So did everyone else. For a 
moment, there was silence. Then a long tear near the 



Page | 195 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




brim opened wide like a mouth, and the hat broke 
into song: 

A thousand years or more ago, 

When I was newly sewn, 

There lived four wizards of renown, 

Whose names are still well known: 

Bold Gryffindor, from wild moor, 

Fair Ravenclaw, from glen, 

Sweet Hufflepuff, from valley broad, 

Shrewd Slytherin, from fen. 

They shared a wish, a hope, a dream, 

They hatched a daring plan 
To educate young sorcerers 
Thus Hogwarts School began. 

Now each of these four founders 
Formed their own house, for each 
Did value different virtues 
In the ones they had to teach. 

By Gryffindor, the bravest were 
Prized far beyond the rest; 

For Ravenclaw, the cleverest 
Would always be the best; 

For Hufflepuff, hard workers were 
Most worthy of admission; 

And power-hungry Slytherin 
Loved those of great ambition. 

While still alive they did divide 
Their favorites from the throng, 

Yet how to pick the worthy ones 
When they were dead and gone? 

Twas Gryffindor who found the way, 

He whipped me off his head 

The founders put some brains in me 

So I could choose instead! 

Now slip me snug about your ears, 

I’ve never yet been wrong, 

111 have a look inside your mind 
And tell where you belong! 

Page | 196 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The Great Hall rang with applause as the Sorting Hat 
finished. 



“That’s not the song it sang when it Sorted us,” said 
Harry, clapping along with everyone else. 

“Sings a different one every year,” said Ron. “It’s got 
to be a pretty boring life, hasn’t it, being a hat? I 
suppose it spends all year making up the next one.” 

Professor McGonagall was now unrolling a large scroll 
of parchment. 

“When I call out your name, you will put on the hat 
and sit on the stool,” she told the first years. “When 
the hat announces your House, you will go and sit at 
the appropriate table. 

“Ackerley, Stewart!” 

A boy walked forward, visibly trembling from head to 
foot, picked up the Sorting Hat, put it on, and sat 
down on the stool. 

“RAVENCLAW!” shouted the hat. 

Stewart Ackerley took off the hat and hurried into a 
seat at the Ravenclaw table, where everyone was 
applauding him. Harry caught a glimpse of Cho, the 
Ravenclaw Seeker, cheering Stewart Ackerley as he 
sat down. For a fleeting second, Harry had a strange 
desire to join the Ravenclaw table too. 

“Baddock, Malcolm!” 

“SLYTHERIN!” 

The table on the other side of the hall erupted with 
cheers; Harry could see Malfoy clapping as Baddock 

Page | 197 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




joined the Slytherins. Harry wondered whether 
Baddock knew that Slytherin House had turned out 
more Dark witches and wizards than any other. Fred 
and George hissed Malcolm Baddock as he sat down. 

“Branstone, Eleanor!” 

“HUFFLEPUFF!” 

“Cauldwell, Owen!” 

“HUFFLEPUFF!” 

“Creevey, Dennis!” 

Tiny Dennis Creevey staggered forward, tripping over 
Hagrid ’s moleskin, just as Hagrid himself sidled into 
the Hall through a door behind the teachers’ table. 
About twice as tall as a normal man, and at least 
three times as broad, Hagrid, with his long, wild, 
tangled black hair and beard, looked slightly alarming 
— a misleading impression, for Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione knew Hagrid to possess a very kind nature. 
He winked at them as he sat down at the end of the 
staff table and watched Dennis Creevey putting on 
the Sorting Hat. The rip at the brim opened wide — 

“GRYFFINDOR!” the hat shouted. 

Hagrid clapped along with the Gryffindors as Dennis 
Creevey, beaming widely, took off the hat, placed it 
back on the stool, and hurried over to join his 
brother. 

“Colin, I fell in!” he said shrilly, throwing himself into 
an empty seat. “It was brilliant! And something in the 
water grabbed me and pushed me back in the boat!” 



Page | 198 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Cool!” said Colin, just as excitedly. “It was probably 
the giant squid, Dennis!” 

“Wow\” said Dennis, as though nobody in their 
wildest dreams could hope for more than being 
thrown into a storm-tossed, fathoms-deep lake, and 
pushed out of it again by a giant sea monster. 

“Dennis! Dennis! See that boy down there? The one 
with the black hair and glasses? See him? Know who 
he is, Dennis ?” 

Harry looked away, staring very hard at the Sorting 
Hat, now Sorting Emma Dobbs. 

The Sorting continued; boys and girls with varying 
degrees of fright on their faces moving one by one to 
the three-legged stool, the line dwindling slowly as 
Professor McGonagall passed the L’s. 

“Oh hurry up,” Ron moaned, massaging his stomach. 

“Now, Ron, the Sorting’s much more important than 
food,” said Nearly Headless Nick as “Madley, Laura!” 
became a Hufflepuff. 

“ ’Course it is, if you’re dead,” snapped Ron. 

“I do hope this year’s batch of Gryffindors are up to 
scratch,” said Nearly Headless Nick, applauding as 
“McDonald, Natalie!” joined the Gryffindor table. “We 
don’t want to break our winning streak, do we?” 

Gryffindor had won the Inter-House Championship 
for the last three years in a row. 

“Pritchard, Graham!” 

“SLYTHERIN!” 

Page | 199 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Quirke, Orla!” 



“RAVENCLAW!” 

And finally, with “Whitby, Kevin!” (“HUFFLEPUFF!”), 
the Sorting ended. Professor McGonagall picked up 
the hat and the stool and carried them away. 

“About time,” said Ron, seizing his knife and fork and 
looking expectantly at his golden plate. 

Professor Dumbledore had gotten to his feet. He was 
smiling around at the students, his arms opened wide 
in welcome. 

“I have only two words to say to you,” he told them, 
his deep voice echoing around the Hall. “ Tuck in.” 

“Hear, hear!” said Harry and Ron loudly as the empty 
dishes filled magically before their eyes. 

Nearly Headless Nick watched mournfully as Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione loaded their own plates. 

“Aaah, ’at’s be’er,” said Ron, with his mouth full of 
mashed potato. 

“You’re lucky there’s a feast at all tonight, you know,” 
said Nearly Headless Nick. “There was trouble in the 
kitchens earlier.” 

“Why? Wha’ ’appened?” said Harry, through a sizable 
chunk of steak. 

“Peeves, of course,” said Nearly Headless Nick, 
shaking his head, which wobbled dangerously. He 
pulled his ruff a little higher up on his neck. “The 
usual argument, you know. He wanted to attend the 
feast — well, it’s quite out of the question, you know 
Page | 200 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




what he’s like, utterly uncivilized, can’t see a plate of 
food without throwing it. We held a ghost’s council — 
the Fat Friar was all for giving him the chance — but 
most wisely, in my opinion, the Bloody Baron put his 
foot down.” 

The Bloody Baron was the Slytherin ghost, a gaunt 
and silent specter covered in silver bloodstains. He 
was the only person at Hogwarts who could really 
control Peeves. 

“Yeah, we thought Peeves seemed hacked off about 
something,” said Ron darkly. “So what did he do in 
the kitchens?” 

“Oh the usual,” said Nearly Headless Nick, shrugging. 
“Wreaked havoc and mayhem. Pots and pans 
everywhere. Place swimming in soup. Terrified the 
house-elves out of their wits — ” 

Clang. 

Hermione had knocked over her golden goblet. 
Pumpkin juice spread steadily over the tablecloth, 
staining several feet of white linen orange, but 
Hermione paid no attention. 

“There are house-elves here?” she said, staring, 
horror-struck, at Nearly Headless Nick. “Here at 
Hogwarts ?” 

“Certainly,” said Nearly Headless Nick, looking 
surprised at her reaction. “The largest number in any 
dwelling in Britain, I believe. Over a hundred.” 

“I’ve never seen one!” said Hermione. 

“Well, they hardly ever leave the kitchen by day, do 
they?” said Nearly Headless Nick. “They come out at 

Page | 201 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




night to do a bit of cleaning . . . see to the fires and so 
on. ... I mean, you’re not supposed to see them, are 
you? That’s the mark of a good house-elf, isn’t it, that 
you don’t know it’s there?” 

Hermione stared at him. 

“But they get paid?” she said. “They get holidays, 
don’t they? And — and sick leave, and pensions, and 
everything?” 

Nearly Headless Nick chortled so much that his ruff 
slipped and his head flopped off, dangling on the inch 
or so of ghostly skin and muscle that still attached it 
to his neck. 

“Sick leave and pensions?” he said, pushing his head 
back onto his shoulders and securing it once more 
with his ruff. “House-elves don’t want sick leave and 
pensions!” 

Hermione looked down at her hardly touched plate of 
food, then put her knife and fork down upon it and 
pushed it away from her. 

“Oh c’mon, ’Er-my-knee,” said Ron, accidentally 
spraying Harry with bits of Yorkshire pudding. “Oops 
— sorry, ’Arry — ” He swallowed. “You won’t get them 
sick leave by starving yourself!” 

“Slave labor,” said Hermione, breathing hard through 
her nose. “That’s what made this dinner. Slave labor.” 

And she refused to eat another bite. 

The rain was still drumming heavily against the high, 
dark glass. Another clap of thunder shook the 
windows, and the stormy ceiling flashed, illuminating 



Page | 202 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the golden plates as the remains of the first course 
vanished and were replaced, instantly, with puddings. 

“Treacle tart, Hermione!” said Ron, deliberately 
wafting its smell toward her. “Spotted dick, look! 
Chocolate gateau!” 

But Hermione gave him a look so reminiscent of 
Professor McGonagall that he gave up. 

When the puddings too had been demolished, and the 
last crumbs had faded off the plates, leaving them 
sparkling clean, Albus Dumbledore got to his feet 
again. The buzz of chatter filling the Hall ceased 
almost at once, so that only the howling wind and 
pounding rain could be heard. 

“So!” said Dumbledore, smiling around at them all. 
“Now that we are all fed and watered,” (“Hmph!” said 
Hermione) “I must once more ask for your attention, 
while I give out a few notices. 

“Mr. Filch, the caretaker, has asked me to tell you 
that the list of objects forbidden inside the castle has 
this year been extended to include Screaming Yo-yos, 
Fanged Frisbees, and Ever-Bashing Boomerangs. The 
full list comprises some four hundred and thirty- 
seven items, I believe, and can be viewed in Mr. 

Filch ’s office, if anybody would like to check it.” 

The corners of Dumbledore ’s mouth twitched. He 
continued, “As ever, I would like to remind you all 
that the forest on the grounds is out-of-bounds to 
students, as is the village of Hogsmeade to all below 
third year. 

“It is also my painful duty to inform you that the 
Inter-House Quidditch Cup will not take place this 
year.” 

Page | 203 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What?” Harry gasped. He looked around at Fred and 
George, his fellow members of the Quidditch team. 
They were mouthing soundlessly at Dumbledore, 
apparently too appalled to speak. Dumbledore went 
on, “This is due to an event that will be starting in 
October, and continuing throughout the school year, 
taking up much of the teachers’ time and energy — 
but I am sure you will all enjoy it immensely. I have 
great pleasure in announcing that this year at 
Hogwarts — ” 

But at that moment, there was a deafening rumble of 
thunder and the doors of the Great Hall banged open. 

A man stood in the doorway, leaning upon a long 
staff, shrouded in a black traveling cloak. Every head 
in the Great Hall swiveled toward the stranger, 
suddenly brightly illuminated by a fork of lightning 
that flashed across the ceiling. He lowered his hood, 
shook out a long mane of grizzled, dark gray hair, 
then began to walk up toward the teachers’ table. 

A dull clunk echoed through the Hall on his every 
other step. He reached the end of the top table, 
turned right, and limped heavily toward Dumbledore. 
Another flash of lightning crossed the ceiling. 
Hermione gasped. 

The lightning had thrown the man’s face into sharp 
relief, and it was a face unlike any Harry had ever 
seen. It looked as though it had been carved out of 
weathered wood by someone who had only the 
vaguest idea of what human faces are supposed to 
look like, and was none too skilled with a chisel. 
Every inch of skin seemed to be scarred. The mouth 
looked like a diagonal gash, and a large chunk of the 
nose was missing. But it was the man’s eyes that 
made him frightening. 



Page | 204 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




One of them was small, dark, and beady. The other 
was large, round as a coin, and a vivid, electric blue. 
The blue eye was moving ceaselessly, without 
blinking, and was rolling up, down, and from side to 
side, quite independently of the normal eye — and 
then it rolled right over, pointing into the back of the 
man’s head, so that all they could see was whiteness. 

The stranger reached Dumbledore. He stretched out a 
hand that was as badly scarred as his face, and 
Dumbledore shook it, muttering words Harry couldn’t 
hear. He seemed to be making some inquiry of the 
stranger, who shook his head unsmilingly and replied 
in an undertone. Dumbledore nodded and gestured 
the man to the empty seat on his right-hand side. 

The stranger sat down, shook his mane of dark gray 
hair out of his face, pulled a plate of sausages toward 
him, raised it to what was left of his nose, and sniffed 
it. He then took a small knife out of his pocket, 
speared a sausage on the end of it, and began to eat. 
His normal eye was fixed upon the sausages, but the 
blue eye was still darting restlessly around in its 
socket, taking in the Hall and the students. 

“May I introduce our new Defense Against the Dark 
Arts teacher?” said Dumbledore brightly into the 
silence. “Professor Moody.” 

It was usual for new staff members to be greeted with 
applause, but none of the staff or students clapped 
except Dumbledore and Hagrid, who both put their 
hands together and applauded, but the sound echoed 
dismally into the silence, and they stopped fairly 
quickly. Everyone else seemed too transfixed by 
Moody’s bizarre appearance to do more than stare at 
him. 



Page | 205 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Moody?” Harry muttered to Ron. “MacL-Eye Moody? 
The one your dad went to help this morning?” 

“Must be,” said Ron in a low, awed voice. 

“What happened to him?” Hermione whispered. “What 
happened to his face?” 

“Dunno,” Ron whispered back, watching Moody with 
fascination. 

Moody seemed totally indifferent to his less-than- 
warm welcome. Ignoring the jug of pumpkin juice in 
front of him, he reached again into his traveling cloak, 
pulled out a hip flask, and took a long draught from 
it. As he lifted his arm to drink, his cloak was pulled a 
few inches from the ground, and Harry saw, below the 
table, several inches of carved wooden leg, ending in a 
clawed foot. 

Dumbledore cleared his throat. 

“As I was saying,” he said, smiling at the sea of 
students before him, all of whom were still gazing 
transfixed at Mad-Eye Moody, “we are to have the 
honor of hosting a very exciting event over the coming 
months, an event that has not been held for over a 
century. It is my very great pleasure to inform you 
that the Triwizard Tournament will be taking place at 
Hogwarts this year.” 

“You’re JOKING!” said Fred Weasley loudly. 

The tension that had filled the Hall ever since Moody’s 
arrival suddenly broke. Nearly everyone laughed, and 
Dumbledore chuckled appreciatively. 

“I am not joking, Mr. Weasley,” he said, “though now 
that you mention it, I did hear an excellent one over 

Page | 206 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the summer about a troll, a hag, and a leprechaun 
who all go into a bar ...” 

Professor McGonagall cleared her throat loudly. 

“Er — but maybe this is not the time ... no ...” said 
Dumbledore, “where was I? Ah yes, the Triwizard 
Tournament ... well, some of you will not know what 
this tournament involves, so I hope those who do 
know will forgive me for giving a short explanation, 
and allow their attention to wander freely. 

“The Triwizard Tournament was first established 
some seven hundred years ago as a friendly 
competition between the three largest European 
schools of wizardry: Hogwarts, Beauxbatons, and 
Durmstrang. A champion was selected to represent 
each school, and the three champions competed in 
three magical tasks. The schools took it in turns to 
host the tournament once every five years, and it was 
generally agreed to be a most excellent way of 
establishing ties between young witches and wizards 
of different nationalities — until, that is, the death toll 
mounted so high that the tournament was 
discontinued.” 

“ Death toll?” Hermione whispered, looking alarmed. 
But her anxiety did not seem to be shared by the 
majority of students in the Hall; many of them were 
whispering excitedly to one another, and Harry 
himself was far more interested in hearing about the 
tournament than in worrying about deaths that had 
happened hundreds of years ago. 

“There have been several attempts over the centuries 
to reinstate the tournament,” Dumbledore continued, 
“none of which has been very successful. However, 
our own departments of International Magical 
Cooperation and Magical Games and Sports have 
Page | 207 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




decided the time is ripe for another attempt. We have 
worked hard over the summer to ensure that this 
time, no champion will find himself or herself in 
mortal danger. 

“The heads of Beauxbatons and Durmstrang will be 
arriving with their short-listed contenders in October, 
and the selection of the three champions will take 
place at Halloween. An impartial judge will decide 
which students are most worthy to compete for the 
Triwizard Cup, the glory of their school, and a 
thousand Galleons personal prize money.” 

“I’m going for it!” Fred Weasley hissed down the table, 
his face lit with enthusiasm at the prospect of such 
glory and riches. He was not the only person who 
seemed to be visualizing himself as the Hogwarts 
champion. At every House table, Harry could see 
people either gazing raptly at Dumbledore, or else 
whispering fervently to their neighbors. But then 
Dumbledore spoke again, and the Hall quieted once 
more. 

“Eager though I know all of you will be to bring the 
Triwizard Cup to Hogwarts,” he said, “the heads of the 
participating schools, along with the Ministry of 
Magic, have agreed to impose an age restriction on 
contenders this year. Only students who are of age — 
that is to say, seventeen years or older — will be 
allowed to put forward their names for consideration. 
This” — Dumbledore raised his voice slightly, for 
several people had made noises of outrage at these 
words, and the Weasley twins were suddenly looking 
furious — “is a measure we feel is necessary, given 
that the tournament tasks will still be difficult and 
dangerous, whatever precautions we take, and it is 
highly unlikely that students below sixth and seventh 
year will be able to cope with them. I will personally 
be ensuring that no underage student hoodwinks our 
Page | 208 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




impartial judge into making them Hogwarts 
champion.” His light blue eyes twinkled as they 
flickered over Fred’s and George’s mutinous faces. “I 
therefore beg you not to waste your time submitting 
yourself if you are under seventeen. 

“The delegations from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang 
will be arriving in October and remaining with us for 
the greater part of this year. I know that you will all 
extend every courtesy to our foreign guests while they 
are with us, and will give your whole-hearted support 
to the Hogwarts champion when he or she is selected. 
And now, it is late, and I know how important it is to 
you all to be alert and rested as you enter your 
lessons tomorrow morning. Bedtime! Chop chop!” 

Dumbledore sat down again and turned to talk to 
Mad-Eye Moody. There was a great scraping and 
banging as all the students got to their feet and 
swarmed toward the double doors into the entrance 
hall. 

“They can’t do that!” said George Weasley, who had 
not joined the crowd moving toward the door, but was 
standing up and glaring at Dumbledore. “We’re 
seventeen in April, why can’t we have a shot?” 

“They’re not stopping me entering,” said Fred 
stubbornly, also scowling at the top table. “The 
champions’ll get to do all sorts of stuff you’d never be 
allowed to do normally. And a thousand Galleons 
prize money!” 

“Yeah,” said Ron, a faraway look on his face. “Yeah, a 
thousand Galleons ...” 

“Come on,” said Hermione, “we’ll be the only ones left 
here if you don’t move.” 



Page | 209 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry, Ron, Hermione, Fred, and George set off for 
the entrance hall, Fred and George debating the ways 
in which Dumbledore might stop those who were 
under seventeen from entering the tournament. 

“Who’s this impartial judge who’s going to decide who 
the champions are?” said Harry. 

“Dunno,” said Fred, “but it’s them we’ll have to fool. I 
reckon a couple of drops of Aging Potion might do it, 
George. ...” 

“Dumbledore knows you’re not of age, though,” said 
Ron. 

“Yeah, but he’s not the one who decides who the 
champion is, is he?” said Fred shrewdly. “Sounds to 
me like once this judge knows who wants to enter, 
he’ll choose the best from each school and never mind 
how old they are. Dumbledore ’s trying to stop us 
giving our names.” 

“People have died, though!” said Hermione in a 
worried voice as they walked through a door 
concealed behind a tapestry and started up another, 
narrower staircase. 

“Yeah,” said Fred airily, “but that was years ago, 
wasn’t it? Anyway, where’s the fun without a bit of 
risk? Hey, Ron, what if we find out how to get ’round 
Dumbledore? Fancy entering?” 

“What d’you reckon?” Ron asked Harry. “Be cool to 
enter, wouldn’t it? But I s’pose they might want 
someone older. ... Dunno if we’ve learned enough. ...” 

“I definitely haven’t,” came Neville’s gloomy voice from 
behind Fred and George. 



Page | 210 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I expect my gran’d want me to try, though. She’s 
always going on about how I should be upholding the 
family honor. I’ll just have to — oops. ...” 

Neville’s foot had sunk right through a step halfway 
up the staircase. There were many of these trick 
stairs at Hogwarts; it was second nature to most of 
the older students to jump this particular step, but 
Neville’s memory was notoriously poor. Harry and 
Ron seized him under the armpits and pulled him 
out, while a suit of armor at the top of the stairs 
creaked and clanked, laughing wheezily. 

“Shut it, you,” said Ron, banging down its visor as 
they passed. 

They made their way up to the entrance to Gryffindor 
Tower, which was concealed behind a large portrait of 
a fat lady in a pink silk dress. 

“Password?” she said as they approached. 

“Balderdash,” said George, “a prefect downstairs told 
me.” 

The portrait swung forward to reveal a hole in the wall 
through which they all climbed. A crackling fire 
warmed the circular common room, which was full of 
squashy armchairs and tables. Hermione cast the 
merrily dancing flames a dark look, and Harry 
distinctly heard her mutter “ Slave labor,” before 
bidding them good night and disappearing through 
the doorway to the girls’ dormitory. 

Harry, Ron, and Neville climbed up the last, spiral 
staircase until they reached their own dormitory, 
which was situated at the top of the tower. Five four- 
poster beds with deep crimson hangings stood against 
the walls, each with its owner’s trunk at the foot. 

Page | 211 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




Dean and Seamus were already getting into bed; 
Seamus had pinned his Ireland rosette to his 
headboard, and Dean had tacked up a poster of 
Viktor Krum over his bedside table. His old poster of 
the West Ham football team was pinned right next to 
it. 

“Mental,” Ron sighed, shaking his head at the 
completely stationary soccer players. 

Harry, Ron, and Neville got into their pajamas and 
into bed. Someone — a house-elf, no doubt — had 
placed warming pans between the sheets. It was 
extremely comfortable, lying there in bed and 
listening to the storm raging outside. 

“I might go in for it, you know,” Ron said sleepily 
through the darkness, “if Fred and George find out 
how to ... the tournament ... you never know, do 
you?” 

“S’pose not. ...” 

Harry rolled over in bed, a series of dazzling new 
pictures forming in his mind’s eye. ... He had 
hoodwinked the impartial judge into believing he was 
seventeen ... he had become Hogwarts champion ... 
he was standing on the grounds, his arms raised in 
triumph in front of the whole school, all of whom were 
applauding and screaming ... he had just won the 
Triwizard Tournament. ... Cho’s face stood out 
particularly clearly in the blurred crowd, her face 
glowing with admiration. ... 

Harry grinned into his pillow, exceptionally glad that 
Ron couldn’t see what he could. 



Page | 212 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






MAD-EYE MOODY 

The storm had blown itself out by the following 
morning, though the ceiling in the Great Hall was still 
gloomy; heavy clouds of pewter gray swirled overhead 
as Harry, Ron, and Hermione examined their new 
course schedules at breakfast. A few seats along, 

Fred, George, and Lee Jordan were discussing 
magical methods of aging themselves and bluffing 
their way into the Triwizard Tournament. 

“Today’s not bad ... outside all morning,” said Ron, 
who was running his finger down the Monday column 
of his schedule. “Herbology with the Hufflepuffs and 
Care of Magical Creatures ... damn it, we’re still with 
the Slytherins. ...” 

“Double Divination this afternoon,” Harry groaned, 
looking down. Divination was his least favorite 
subject, apart from Potions. Professor Trelawney kept 
predicting Harry’s death, which he found extremely 
annoying. 



Page | 213 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“You should have given it up like me, shouldn’t you?” 
said Hermione briskly, buttering herself some toast. 
“Then you’d be doing something sensible like 
Arithmancy.” 

“You’re eating again, I notice,” said Ron, watching 
Hermione adding liberal amounts of jam to her toast 
too. 

“I’ve decided there are better ways of making a stand 
about elf rights,” said Hermione haughtily. 

“Yeah ... and you were hungry,” said Ron, grinning. 

There was a sudden rustling noise above them, and a 
hundred owls came soaring through the open 
windows carrying the morning mail. Instinctively, 
Harry looked up, but there was no sign of white 
among the mass of brown and gray. The owls circled 
the tables, looking for the people to whom their letters 
and packages were addressed. A large tawny owl 
soared down to Neville Longbottom and deposited a 
parcel into his lap — Neville almost always forgot to 
pack something. On the other side of the Hall Draco 
Malfoy’s eagle owl had landed on his shoulder, 
carrying what looked like his usual supply of sweets 
and cakes from home. Trying to ignore the sinking 
feeling of disappointment in his stomach, Harry 
returned to his porridge. Was it possible that 
something had happened to Hedwig, and that Sirius 
hadn’t even got his letter? 

His preoccupation lasted all the way across the 
sodden vegetable patch until they arrived in 
greenhouse three, but here he was distracted by 
Professor Sprout showing the class the ugliest plants 
Harry had ever seen. Indeed, they looked less like 
plants than thick, black, giant slugs, protruding 
vertically out of the soil. Each was squirming slightly 
Page | 214 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




and had a number of large, shiny swellings upon it, 
which appeared to be full of liquid. 

“Bubotubers,” Professor Sprout told them briskly. 
“They need squeezing. You will collect the pus — ” 

“The what?” said Seamus Finnigan, sounding 
revolted. 

“Pus, Finnigan, pus,” said Professor Sprout, “and it’s 
extremely valuable, so don’t waste it. You will collect 
the pus, I say, in these bottles. Wear your dragon- 
hide gloves; it can do funny things to the skin when 
undiluted, bubotuber pus.” 

Squeezing the bubotubers was disgusting, but oddly 
satisfying. As each swelling was popped, a large 
amount of thick yellowish-green liquid burst forth, 
which smelled strongly of petrol. They caught it in the 
bottles as Professor Sprout had indicated, and by the 
end of the lesson had collected several pints. 

“This’ll keep Madam Pomfrey happy,” said Professor 
Sprout, stoppering the last bottle with a cork. “An 
excellent remedy for the more stubborn forms of acne, 
bubotuber pus. Should stop students resorting to 
desperate measures to rid themselves of pimples.” 

“Like poor Eloise Midgen,” said Hannah Abbott, a 
Hufflepuff, in a hushed voice. “She tried to curse hers 
off.” 

“Silly girl,” said Professor Sprout, shaking her head. 
“But Madam Pomfrey fixed her nose back on in the 
end.” 

A booming bell echoed from the castle across the wet 
grounds, signaling the end of the lesson, and the 
class separated; the Hufflepuffs climbing the stone 

Page | 215 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




steps for Transfiguration, and the Gryffindors heading 
in the other direction, down the sloping lawn toward 
Hagrid ’s small wooden cabin, which stood on the edge 
of the Forbidden Forest. 

Hagrid was standing outside his hut, one hand on the 
collar of his enormous black boarhound, Fang. There 
were several open wooden crates on the ground at his 
feet, and Fang was whimpering and straining at his 
collar, apparently keen to investigate the contents 
more closely. As they drew nearer, an odd rattling 
noise reached their ears, punctuated by what 
sounded like minor explosions. 

“Mornin’!” Hagrid said, grinning at Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione. “Be’er wait fer the Slytherins, they won’ 
want ter miss this — Blast-Ended Skrewts!” 

“Come again?” said Ron. 

Hagrid pointed down into the crates. 

“Eurgh!” squealed Lavender Brown, jumping 
backward. 

“Eurgh” just about summed up the Blast-Ended 
Skrewts in Harry’s opinion. They looked like 
deformed, shell-less lobsters, horribly pale and slimy - 
looking, with legs sticking out in very odd places and 
no visible heads. There were about a hundred of them 
in each crate, each about six inches long, crawling 
over one another, bumping blindly into the sides of 
the boxes. They were giving off a very powerful smell 
of rotting fish. Every now and then, sparks would fly 
out of the end of a skrewt, and with a small phut, it 
would be propelled forward several inches. 



Page | 216 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“On’y jus’ hatched,” said Hagrid proudly, “so yeh’ll be 
able ter raise ’em yerselves! Thought we’d make a bit 
of a project of it!” 

“And why would we want to raise them?” said a cold 
voice. 

The Slytherins had arrived. The speaker was Draco 
Malfoy. Crabbe and Goyle were chuckling 
appreciatively at his words. 

Hagrid looked stumped at the question. 

“I mean, what do they do?” asked Malfoy. “What is the 
point of them?” 

Hagrid opened his mouth, apparently thinking hard; 
there was a few seconds’ pause, then he said roughly, 
“Tha’s next lesson, Malfoy. Yer jus’ feedin’ ’em today. 
Now, yeh’ll wan’ ter try ’em on a few diff’rent things — 
I’ve never had ’em before, not sure what they’ll go fer 

— I got ant eggs an’ frog livers an’ a bit o’ grass snake 

— just try ’em out with a bit of each.” 

“First pus and now this,” muttered Seamus. 

Nothing but deep affection for Hagrid could have 
made Harry, Ron, and Hermione pick up squelchy 
handfuls of frog liver and lower them into the crates 
to tempt the Blast-Ended Skrewts. Harry couldn’t 
suppress the suspicion that the whole thing was 
entirely pointless, because the skrewts didn’t seem to 
have mouths. 

“Ouch\” yelled Dean Thomas after about ten minutes. 
“It got me!” 

Hagrid hurried over to him, looking anxious. 



Page | 217 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Its end exploded!” said Dean angrily, showing Hagrid 
a burn on his hand. 

“Ah, yeah, that can happen when they blast off,” said 
Hagrid, nodding. 

“Eurgh!” said Lavender Brown again. “Eurgh, Hagrid, 
what’s that pointy thing on it?” 

“Ah, some of ’em have got stings,” said Hagrid 
enthusiastically (Lavender quickly withdrew her hand 
from the box). “I reckon they’re the males. ... The 
females Ve got sorta sucker things on their bellies. ... I 
think they might be ter suck blood.” 

“Well, I can certainly see why we’re trying to keep 
them alive,” said Malfoy sarcastically. “Who wouldn’t 
want pets that can burn, sting, and bite all at once?” 

“Just because they’re not very pretty, it doesn’t mean 
they’re not useful,” Hermione snapped. “Dragon 
blood’s amazingly magical, but you wouldn’t want a 
dragon for a pet, would you?” 

Harry and Ron grinned at Hagrid, who gave them a 
furtive smile from behind his bushy beard. Hagrid 
would have liked nothing better than a pet dragon, as 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione knew only too well — he 
had owned one for a brief period during their first 
year, a vicious Norwegian Ridgeback by the name of 
Norbert. Hagrid simply loved monstrous creatures, 
the more lethal, the better. 

“Well, at least the skrewts are small,” said Ron as 
they made their way back up to the castle for lunch 
an hour later. 



Page | 218 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“They are now,” said Hermione in an exasperated 
voice, “but once Hagrid’s found out what they eat, I 
expect they’ll be six feet long.” 

“Well, that won’t matter if they turn out to cure 
seasickness or something, will it?” said Ron, grinning 
slyly at her. 

“You know perfectly well I only said that to shut 
Malfoy up,” said Hermione. “As a matter of fact I 
think he’s right. The best thing to do would be to 
stamp on the lot of them before they start attacking 
us all.” 

They sat down at the Gryffindor table and helped 
themselves to lamb chops and potatoes. Hermione 
began to eat so fast that Harry and Ron stared at her. 

“Er — is this the new stand on elf rights?” said Ron. 
“You’re going to make yourself puke instead?” 

“No,” said Hermione, with as much dignity as she 
could muster with her mouth bulging with sprouts. “I 
just want to get to the library.” 

“What?” said Ron in disbelief. “Hermione — it’s the 
first day back! We haven’t even got homework yet!” 

Hermione shrugged and continued to shovel down her 
food as though she had not eaten for days. Then she 
leapt to her feet, said, “See you at dinner!” and 
departed at high speed. 

When the bell rang to signal the start of afternoon 
lessons, Harry and Ron set off for North Tower where, 
at the top of a tightly spiraling staircase, a silver 
stepladder led to a circular trapdoor in the ceiling, 
and the room where Professor Trelawney lived. 



Page | 219 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The familiar sweet perfume spreading from the fire 
met their nostrils as they emerged at the top of the 
stepladder. As ever, the curtains were all closed; the 
circular room was bathed in a dim reddish light cast 
by the many lamps, which were all draped with 
scarves and shawls. Harry and Ron walked through 
the mass of occupied chintz chairs and poufs that 
cluttered the room, and sat down at the same small 
circular table. 

“Good day,” said the misty voice of Professor 
Trelawney right behind Harry, making him jump. 

A very thin woman with enormous glasses that made 
her eyes appear far too large for her face, Professor 
Trelawney was peering down at Harry with the tragic 
expression she always wore whenever she saw him. 
The usual large amount of beads, chains, and bangles 
glittered upon her person in the firelight. 

“You are preoccupied, my dear,” she said mournfully 
to Harry. “My inner eye sees past your brave face to 
the troubled soul within. And I regret to say that your 
worries are not baseless. I see difficult times ahead 
for you, alas ... most difficult ... I fear the thing you 
dread will indeed come to pass ... and perhaps sooner 
than you think. ...” 

Her voice dropped almost to a whisper. Ron rolled his 
eyes at Harry, who looked stonily back. Professor 
Trelawney swept past them and seated herself in a 
large winged armchair before the fire, facing the class. 
Lavender Brown and Parvati Patil, who deeply 
admired Professor Trelawney, were sitting on poufs 
very close to her. 

“My dears, it is time for us to consider the stars,” she 
said. “The movements of the planets and the 
mysterious portents they reveal only to those who 

Page | 220 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




understand the steps of the celestial dance. Human 
destiny may be deciphered by the planetary rays, 
which intermingle ...” 

But Harry’s thoughts had drifted. The perfumed fire 
always made him feel sleepy and dull-witted, and 
Professor Trelawney’s rambling talks on fortune- 
telling never held him exactly spellbound — though 
he couldn’t help thinking about what she had just 
said to him. “ ‘I fear the thing you dread will indeed 
come to pass . . . ’ ” 

But Hermione was right, Harry thought irritably, 
Professor Trelawney really was an old fraud. He 
wasn’t dreading anything at the moment at all ... well, 
unless you counted his fears that Sirius had been 
caught ... but what did Professor Trelawney know? He 
had long since come to the conclusion that her brand 
of fortune-telling was really no more than lucky 
guesswork and a spooky manner. 

Except, of course, for that time at the end of last 
term, when she had made the prediction about 
Voldemort rising again . . . and Dumbledore himself 
had said that he thought that trance had been 
genuine, when Harry had described it to him. ... 

“Harry\” Ron muttered. 

“What?” 

Harry looked around; the whole class was staring at 
him. He sat up straight; he had been almost dozing 
off, lost in the heat and his thoughts. 

“I was saying, my dear, that you were clearly born 
under the baleful influence of Saturn,” said Professor 
Trelawney, a faint note of resentment in her voice at 



Page | 221 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the fact that he had obviously not been hanging on 
her words. 

“Born under — what, sorry?” said Harry. 

“Saturn, dear, the planet Saturn!” said Professor 
Trelawney, sounding definitely irritated that he wasn’t 
riveted by this news. “I was saying that Saturn was 
surely in a position of power in the heavens at the 
moment of your birth. ... Your dark hair ... your mean 
stature ... tragic losses so young in life ... I think I am 
right in saying, my dear, that you were born in 
midwinter?” 

“No,” said Harry, “I was born in July.” 

Ron hastily turned his laugh into a hacking cough. 

Half an hour later, each of them had been given a 
complicated circular chart, and was attempting to fill 
in the position of the planets at their moment of birth. 
It was dull work, requiring much consultation of 
timetables and calculation of angles. 

“I’ve got two Neptunes here,” said Harry after a while, 
frowning down at his piece of parchment, “that can’t 
be right, can it?” 

“Aaaaah,” said Ron, imitating Professor Trelawney’s 
mystical whisper, “when two Neptunes appear in the 
sky, it is a sure sign that a midget in glasses is being 
born, Harry ...” 

Seamus and Dean, who were working nearby, 
sniggered loudly, though not loudly enough to mask 
the excited squeals from Lavender Brown — “Oh 
Professor, look! I think I’ve got an unaspected planet! 
Oooh, which one’s that, Professor?” 



Page | 222 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It is Uranus, my dear,” said Professor Trelawney, 
peering down at the chart. 

“Can I have a look at Uranus too, Lavender?” said 
Ron. 

Most unfortunately, Professor Trelawney heard him, 
and it was this, perhaps, that made her give them so 
much homework at the end of the class. 

“A detailed analysis of the way the planetary 
movements in the coming month will affect you, with 
reference to your personal chart,” she snapped, 
sounding much more like Professor McGonagall than 
her usual airy-fairy self. “I want it ready to hand in 
next Monday, and no excuses!” 

“Miserable old bat,” said Ron bitterly as they joined 
the crowds descending the staircases back to the 
Great Hall and dinner. “Thatll take all weekend, that 
will. ...” 

“Lots of homework?” said Hermione brightly, catching 
up with them. “Professor Vector didn’t give us any at 
all!” 

“Well, bully for Professor Vector,” said Ron moodily. 

They reached the entrance hall, which was packed 
with people queuing for dinner. They had just joined 
the end of the line, when a loud voice rang out behind 
them. 

“Weasley! Hey, Weasley!” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione turned. Malfoy, Crabbe, 
and Goyle were standing there, each looking 
thoroughly pleased about something. 



Page | 223 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What?” said Ron shortly. 



“Your dad’s in the paper, Weasley!” said Malfoy, 
brandishing a copy of the Daily Prophet and speaking 
very loudly, so that everyone in the packed entrance 
hall could hear. “Listen to this! 

FURTHER MISTAKES AT THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC 

It seems as though the Ministry of Magic’s troubles are 
not yet at an end, writes Rita Skeeter, Special 
Correspondent. Recently under fire for its poor crowd 
control at the Quidditch World Cup, and still unable to 
account for the disappearance of one of its witches, the 
Ministry was plunged into fresh embarrassment 
yesterday by the antics of Arnold Weasley, of the 
Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office. ” 

Malfoy looked up. 

“Imagine them not even getting his name right, 
Weasley. It’s almost as though he’s a complete 
nonentity, isn’t it?” he crowed. 

Everyone in the entrance hall was listening now. 
Malfoy straightened the paper with a flourish and 
read on: 

Arnold Weasley, who was charged with possession of 
a flying car two years ago, was yesterday involved in 
a tussle with several Muggle law-keepers (“policemen”) 
over a number of highly aggressive dustbins. Mr. 
Weasley appears to have rushed to the aid of “Mad- 
Eye” Moody, the aged ex-Auror who retired from the 
Ministry when no longer able to tell the difference 
between a handshake and attempted murder. 
Unsurprisingly, Mr. Weasley found, upon arrival at Mr. 
Moody ’s heavily guarded house, that Mr. Moody had 
once again raised a false alarm. Mr. Weasley was 
Page | 224 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




forced to modify several memories before he could 
escape from the policemen, but refused to answer 
Daily Prophet questions about why he had involved 
the Ministry in such an undignified and potentially 
embarrassing scene. 

“And there’s a picture, Weasley!” said Malfoy, flipping 
the paper over and holding it up. “A picture of your 
parents outside their house — if you can call it a 
house! Your mother could do with losing a bit of 
weight, couldn’t she?” 

Ron was shaking with fury. Everyone was staring at 
him. 

“Get stuffed, Malfoy,” said Harry. “C’mon, Ron. ...” 

“Oh yeah, you were staying with them this summer, 
weren’t you, Potter?” sneered Malfoy. “So tell me, is 
his mother really that porky, or is it just the picture?” 

“You know your mother, Malfoy?” said Harry — both 
he and Hermione had grabbed the back of Ron’s 
robes to stop him from launching himself at Malfoy — 
“that expression she’s got, like she’s got dung under 
her nose? Has she always looked like that, or was it 
just because you were with her?” 

Malfoy’s pale face went slightly pink. 

“Don’t you dare insult my mother, Potter.” 

“Keep your fat mouth shut, then,” said Harry, turning 
away. 

BANG! 

Several people screamed — Harry felt something 
white-hot graze the side of his face — he plunged his 

Page | 225 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




hand into his robes for his wand, but before he’d even 
touched it, he heard a second loud BANG, and a roar 
that echoed through the entrance hall. 

“OH NO YOU DONT, LADDIE!” 

Harry spun around. Professor Moody was limping 
down the marble staircase. His wand was out and it 
was pointing right at a pure white ferret, which was 
shivering on the stone-flagged floor, exactly where 
Malfoy had been standing. 

There was a terrified silence in the entrance hall. 
Nobody but Moody was moving a muscle. Moody 
turned to look at Harry — at least, his normal eye was 
looking at Harry; the other one was pointing into the 
back of his head. 

“Did he get you?” Moody growled. His voice was low 
and gravelly. 

“No,” said Harry, “missed.” 

“LEAVE IT!” Moody shouted. 

“Leave — what?” Harry said, bewildered. 

“Not you — him!” Moody growled, jerking his thumb 
over his shoulder at Crabbe, who had just frozen, 
about to pick up the white ferret. It seemed that 
Moody’s rolling eye was magical and could see out of 
the back of his head. 

Moody started to limp toward Crabbe, Goyle, and the 
ferret, which gave a terrified squeak and took off, 
streaking toward the dungeons. 

“I don’t think so!” roared Moody, pointing his wand at 
the ferret again — it flew ten feet into the air, fell with 

Page | 226 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




a smack to the floor, and then bounced upward once 
more. 

“I don’t like people who attack when their opponent’s 
back’s turned,” growled Moody as the ferret bounced 
higher and higher, squealing in pain. “Stinking, 
cowardly, scummy thing to do. ...” 

The ferret flew through the air, its legs and tail flailing 
helplessly. 

“Never — do — that — again — ” said Moody, speaking 
each word as the ferret hit the stone floor and 
bounced upward again. 

“Professor Moody!” said a shocked voice. 

Professor McGonagall was coming down the marble 
staircase with her arms full of books. 

“Hello, Professor McGonagall,” said Moody calmly, 
bouncing the ferret still higher. 

“What — what are you doing?” said Professor 
McGonagall, her eyes following the bouncing ferret’s 
progress through the air. 

“Teaching,” said Moody. 

“Teach — Moody, is that a student?” shrieked 
Professor McGonagall, the books spilling out of her 
arms. 

“Yep,” said Moody. 

“No!” cried Professor McGonagall, running down the 
stairs and pulling out her wand; a moment later, with 
a loud snapping noise, Draco Malfoy had reappeared, 
lying in a heap on the floor with his sleek blond hair 

Page | 227 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




all over his now brilliantly pink face. He got to his 
feet, wincing. 

“Moody, we never use Transfiguration as a 
punishment!” said Professor McGonagall weakly. 
“Surely Professor Dumbledore told you that?” 

“He might’ve mentioned it, yeah,” said Moody, 
scratching his chin unconcernedly, “but I thought a 
good sharp shock — ” 

“We give detentions, Moody! Or speak to the offender’s 
Head of House!” 

“I’ll do that, then,” said Moody, staring at Malfoy with 
great dislike. 

Malfoy, whose pale eyes were still watering with pain 
and humiliation, looked malevolently up at Moody 
and muttered something in which the words “my 
father” were distinguishable. 

“Oh yeah?” said Moody quietly, limping forward a few 
steps, the dull clunk of his wooden leg echoing around 
the hall. “Well, I know your father of old, boy. ... You 
tell him Moody’s keeping a close eye on his son . . . you 
tell him that from me. ... Now, your Head of House’ll 
be Snape, will it?” 

“Yes,” said Malfoy resentfully. 

“Another old friend,” growled Moody. “I’ve been 
looking forward to a chat with old Snape. ... Come on, 
you. ...” 

And he seized Malfoy’s upper arm and marched him 
off toward the dungeons. 



Page | 228 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Professor McGonagall stared anxiously after them for 
a few moments, then waved her wand at her fallen 
books, causing them to soar up into the air and back 
into her arms. 

“Don’t talk to me,” Ron said quietly to Harry and 
Hermione as they sat down at the Gryffindor table a 
few minutes later, surrounded by excited talk on all 
sides about what had just happened. 

“Why not?” said Hermione in surprise. 

“Because I want to fix that in my memory forever,” 
said Ron, his eyes closed and an uplifted expression 
on his face. “Draco Malfoy, the amazing bouncing 
ferret ...” 

Harry and Hermione both laughed, and Hermione 
began doling beef casserole onto each of their plates. 

“He could have really hurt Malfoy, though,” she said. 
“It was good, really, that Professor McGonagall 
stopped it — ” 

“Hermione!” said Ron furiously, his eyes snapping 
open again, “you’re ruining the best moment of my 
life!” 

Hermione made an impatient noise and began to eat 
at top speed again. 

“Don’t tell me you’re going back to the library this 
evening?” said Harry, watching her. 

“Got to,” said Hermione thickly. “Loads to do.” 

“But you told us Professor Vector — ” 



Page | 229 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s not schoolwork,” she said. Within five minutes, 
she had cleared her plate and departed. No sooner 
had she gone than her seat was taken by Fred 
Weasley. 

“Moody!” he said. “How cool is he?” 

“Beyond cool,” said George, sitting down opposite 
Fred. 

“Supercool,” said the twins’ best friend, Lee Jordan, 
sliding into the seat beside George. “We had him this 
afternoon,” he told Harry and Ron. 

“What was it like?” said Harry eagerly. 

Fred, George, and Lee exchanged looks full of 
meaning. 

“Never had a lesson like it,” said Fred. 

“He knows, man,” said Lee. 

“Knows what?” said Ron, leaning forward. 

“Knows what it’s like to be out there doing it,” said 
George impressively. 

“Doing what?” said Harry. 

“Fighting the Dark Arts,” said Fred. 

“He’s seen it all,” said George. 

“ ’Mazing,” said Lee. 

Ron dived into his bag for his schedule. 



Page | 230 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“We haven’t got him till Thursday!” he said in a 
disappointed voice. 



Page | 231 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE UNFORGIVABLE CURSES 

The next two days passed without great incident, 
unless you counted Neville melting his sixth cauldron 
in Potions. Professor Snape, who seemed to have 
attained new levels of vindictiveness over the 
summer, gave Neville detention, and Neville returned 
from it in a state of nervous collapse, having been 
made to disembowel a barrel full of horned toads. 

“You know why Snape ’s in such a foul mood, don’t 
you?” said Ron to Harry as they watched Hermione 
teaching Neville a Scouring Charm to remove the frog 
guts from under his fingernails. 

“Yeah,” said Harry. “Moody.” 

It was common knowledge that Snape really wanted 
the Dark Arts job, and he had now failed to get it for 
the fourth year running. Snape had disliked all of 
their previous Dark Arts teachers, and shown it — 
but he seemed strangely wary of displaying overt 
animosity to Mad-Eye Moody. Indeed, whenever Harry 
saw the two of them together — at mealtimes, or 

Page | 232 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



when they passed in the corridors — he had the 
distinct impression that Snape was avoiding Moody’s 
eye, whether magical or normal. 

“I reckon Snape’s a bit scared of him, you know,” 
Harry said thoughtfully. 

“Imagine if Moody turned Snape into a horned toad,” 
said Ron, his eyes misting over, “and bounced him all 
around his dungeon. ...” 

The Gryffindor fourth years were looking forward to 
Moody’s first lesson so much that they arrived early 
on Thursday lunchtime and queued up outside his 
classroom before the bell had even rung. The only 
person missing was Hermione, who turned up just in 
time for the lesson. 

“Been in the — ” 

“Library.” Harry finished her sentence for her. 

“C’mon, quick, or we won’t get decent seats.” 

They hurried into three chairs right in front of the 
teacher’s desk, took out their copies of The Dark 
Forces: A Guide to Self-Protection, and waited, 
unusually quiet. Soon they heard Moody’s distinctive 
clunking footsteps coming down the corridor, and he 
entered the room, looking as strange and frightening 
as ever. They could just see his clawed, wooden foot 
protruding from underneath his robes. 

“You can put those away,” he growled, stumping over 
to his desk and sitting down, “those books. You won’t 
need them.” 

They returned the books to their bags, Ron looking 
excited. 



Page | 233 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Moody took out a register, shook his long mane of 
grizzled gray hair out of his twisted and scarred face, 
and began to call out names, his normal eye moving 
steadily down the list while his magical eye swiveled 
around, fixing upon each student as he or she 
answered. 

“Right then,” he said, when the last person had 
declared themselves present, “I’ve had a letter from 
Professor Lupin about this class. Seems you’ve had a 
pretty thorough grounding in tackling Dark creatures 
— you’ve covered boggarts, Red Caps, hinkypunks, 
grindylows, Kappas, and werewolves, is that right?” 

There was a general murmur of assent. 

“But you’re behind — very behind — on dealing with 
curses,” said Moody. “So I’m here to bring you up to 
scratch on what wizards can do to each other. I’ve got 
one year to teach you how to deal with Dark — ” 

“What, aren’t you staying?” Ron blurted out. 

Moody’s magical eye spun around to stare at Ron; 

Ron looked extremely apprehensive, but after a 
moment Moody smiled — the first time Harry had 
seen him do so. The effect was to make his heavily 
scarred face look more twisted and contorted than 
ever, but it was nevertheless good to know that he 
ever did anything as friendly as smile. Ron looked 
deeply relieved. 

“You’ll be Arthur Weasley’s son, eh?” Moody said. 
“Your father got me out of a very tight corner a few 
days ago. ... Yeah, I’m staying just the one year. 
Special favor to Dumbledore. ... One year, and then 
back to my quiet retirement.” 



Page | 234 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He gave a harsh laugh, and then clapped his gnarled 
hands together. 

“So — straight into it. Curses. They come in many 
strengths and forms. Now, according to the Ministry 
of Magic, I’m supposed to teach you countercurses 
and leave it at that. I’m not supposed to show you 
what illegal Dark curses look like until you’re in the 
sixth year. You’re not supposed to be old enough to 
deal with it till then. But Professor Dumbledore’s got 
a higher opinion of your nerves, he reckons you can 
cope, and I say, the sooner you know what you’re up 
against, the better. How are you supposed to defend 
yourself against something you’ve never seen? A 
wizard who’s about to put an illegal curse on you isn’t 
going to tell you what he’s about to do. He’s not going 
to do it nice and polite to your face. You need to be 
prepared. You need to be alert and watchful. You 
need to put that away, Miss Brown, when I’m 
talking.” 

Lavender jumped and blushed. She had been showing 
Parvati her completed horoscope under the desk. 
Apparently Moody’s magical eye could see through 
solid wood, as well as out of the back of his head. 

“So ... do any of you know which curses are most 
heavily punished by wizarding law?” 

Several hands rose tentatively into the air, including 
Ron’s and Hermione’s. Moody pointed at Ron, though 
his magical eye was still fixed on Lavender. 

“Er,” said Ron tentatively, “my dad told me about one. 
... Is it called the Imperius Curse, or something?” 

“Ah, yes,” said Moody appreciatively. “Your father 
would know that one. Gave the Ministry a lot of 
trouble at one time, the Imperius Curse.” 

Page | 235 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Moody got heavily to his mismatched feet, opened his 
desk drawer, and took out a glass jar. Three large 
black spiders were scuttling around inside it. Harry 
felt Ron recoil slightly next to him — Ron hated 
spiders. 

Moody reached into the jar, caught one of the spiders, 
and held it in the palm of his hand so that they could 
all see it. He then pointed his wand at it and 
muttered, “Imperio\” 

The spider leapt from Moody’s hand on a fine thread 
of silk and began to swing backward and forward as 
though on a trapeze. It stretched out its legs rigidly, 
then did a back flip, breaking the thread and landing 
on the desk, where it began to cartwheel in circles. 
Moody jerked his wand, and the spider rose onto two 
of its hind legs and went into what was unmistakably 
a tap dance. 

Everyone was laughing — everyone except Moody. 

“Think it’s funny, do you?” he growled. “You’d like it, 
would you, if I did it to you?” 

The laughter died away almost instantly. 

“Total control,” said Moody quietly as the spider 
balled itself up and began to roll over and over. “I 
could make it jump out of the window, drown itself, 
throw itself down one of your throats ...” 

Ron gave an involuntary shudder. 

“Years back, there were a lot of witches and wizards 
being controlled by the Imperius Curse,” said Moody, 
and Harry knew he was talking about the days in 
which Voldemort had been all-powerful. “Some job for 



Page | 236 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the Ministry, trying to sort out who was being forced 
to act, and who was acting of their own free will. 

“The Imperius Curse can be fought, and I’ll be 
teaching you how, but it takes real strength of 
character, and not everyone’s got it. Better avoid 
being hit with it if you can. CONSTANT VIGILANCE!” 
he barked, and everyone jumped. 

Moody picked up the somersaulting spider and threw 
it back into the jar. 

“Anyone else know one? Another illegal curse?” 

Hermione’s hand flew into the air again and so, to 
Harry’s slight surprise, did Neville’s. The only class in 
which Neville usually volunteered information was 
Herbology, which was easily his best subject. Neville 
looked surprised at his own daring. 

“Yes?” said Moody, his magical eye rolling right over 
to fix on Neville. 

“There’s one — the Cruciatus Curse,” said Neville in a 
small but distinct voice. 

Moody was looking very intently at Neville, this time 
with both eyes. 

“Your name’s Longbottom?” he said, his magical eye 
swooping down to check the register again. 

Neville nodded nervously, but Moody made no further 
inquiries. Turning back to the class at large, he 
reached into the jar for the next spider and placed it 
upon the desktop, where it remained motionless, 
apparently too scared to move. 



Page | 237 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“The Cruciatus Curse,” said Moody. “Needs to be a bit 
bigger for you to get the idea,” he said, pointing his 
wand at the spider. “Engorgio\” 

The spider swelled. It was now larger than a 
tarantula. Abandoning all pretense, Ron pushed his 
chair backward, as far away from Moody’s desk as 
possible. 

Moody raised his wand again, pointed it at the spider, 
and muttered, “CrucioV’ 

At once, the spider’s legs bent in upon its body; it 
rolled over and began to twitch horribly, rocking from 
side to side. No sound came from it, but Harry was 
sure that if it could have given voice, it would have 
been screaming. Moody did not remove his wand, and 
the spider started to shudder and jerk more violently 



“Stop it!” Hermione said shrilly. 

Harry looked around at her. She was looking, not at 
the spider, but at Neville, and Harry, following her 
gaze, saw that Neville’s hands were clenched upon the 
desk in front of him, his knuckles white, his eyes 
wide and horrified. 

Moody raised his wand. The spider’s legs relaxed, but 
it continued to twitch. 

“Reducio,” Moody muttered, and the spider shrank 
back to its proper size. He put it back into the jar. 

“Pain,” said Moody softly. “You don’t need 
thumbscrews or knives to torture someone if you can 
perform the Cruciatus Curse. ... That one was very 
popular once too. 



Page | 238 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Right . . . anyone know any others?” 



Harry looked around. From the looks on everyone’s 
faces, he guessed they were all wondering what was 
going to happen to the last spider. Hermione’s hand 
shook slightly as, for the third time, she raised it into 
the air. 

“Yes?” said Moody, looking at her. 

“Avada Kedavra,” Hermione whispered. 

Several people looked uneasily around at her, 
including Ron. 

“Ah,” said Moody, another slight smile twisting his 
lopsided mouth. “Yes, the last and worst. Avada 
Kedavra ... the Killing Curse.” 

He put his hand into the glass jar, and almost as 
though it knew what was coming, the third spider 
scuttled frantically around the bottom of the jar, 
trying to evade Moody’s fingers, but he trapped it, and 
placed it upon the desktop. It started to scuttle 
frantically across the wooden surface. 

Moody raised his wand, and Harry felt a sudden thrill 
of foreboding. 

“Avada Kedavral” Moody roared. 

There was a flash of blinding green light and a 
rushing sound, as though a vast, invisible something 
was soaring through the air — instantaneously the 
spider rolled over onto its back, unmarked, but 
unmistakably dead. Several of the students stifled 
cries; Ron had thrown himself backward and almost 
toppled off his seat as the spider skidded toward him. 

Page | 239 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Moody swept the dead spider off the desk onto the 
floor. 

“Not nice,” he said calmly. “Not pleasant. And there’s 
no countercurse. There’s no blocking it. Only one 
known person has ever survived it, and he’s sitting 
right in front of me.” 

Harry felt his face redden as Moody’s eyes (both of 
them) looked into his own. He could feel everyone else 
looking around at him too. Harry stared at the blank 
blackboard as though fascinated by it, but not really 
seeing it at all. ... 

So that was how his parents had died . . . exactly like 
that spider. Had they been unblemished and 
unmarked too? Had they simply seen the flash of 
green light and heard the rush of speeding death, 
before life was wiped from their bodies? 

Harry had been picturing his parents’ deaths over 
and over again for three years now, ever since he’d 
found out they had been murdered, ever since he’d 
found out what had happened that night: Wormtail 
had betrayed his parents’ whereabouts to Voldemort, 
who had come to find them at their cottage. How 
Voldemort had killed Harry’s father first. How James 
Potter had tried to hold him off, while he shouted at 
his wife to take Harry and run ... Voldemort had 
advanced on Lily Potter, told her to move aside so 
that he could kill Harry . . . how she had begged him to 
kill her instead, refused to stop shielding her son . . . 
and so Voldemort had murdered her too, before 
turning his wand on Harry. . . . 

Harry knew these details because he had heard his 
parents’ voices when he had fought the dementors 
last year — for that was the terrible power of the 
dementors: to force their victims to relive the worst 

Page | 240 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




memories of their lives, and drown, powerless, in their 
own despair. . . . 

Moody was speaking again, from a great distance, it 
seemed to Harry. With a massive effort, he pulled 
himself back to the present and listened to what 
Moody was saying. 

“Avada Kedavra’s a curse that needs a powerful bit of 
magic behind it — you could all get your wands out 
now and point them at me and say the words, and I 
doubt I’d get so much as a nosebleed. But that 
doesn’t matter. I’m not here to teach you how to do it. 

“Now, if there’s no countercurse, why am I showing 
you? Because you’ve got to know. You’ve got to 
appreciate what the worst is. You don’t want to find 
yourself in a situation where you’re facing it. 
CONSTANT VIGILANCE!” he roared, and the whole 
class jumped again. 

“Now ... those three curses — Avada Kedavra, 
Imperius, and Cruciatus — are known as the 
Unforgivable Curses. The use of any one of them on a 
fellow human being is enough to earn a life sentence 
in Azkaban. That’s what you’re up against. That’s 
what I’ve got to teach you to fight. You need 
preparing. You need arming. But most of all, you 
need to practice constant, never-ceasing vigilance. Get 
out your quills ... copy this down. ...” 

They spent the rest of the lesson taking notes on each 
of the Unforgivable Curses. No one spoke until the 
bell rang — but when Moody had dismissed them and 
they had left the classroom, a torrent of talk burst 
forth. Most people were discussing the curses in awed 
voices — “Did you see it twitch?” “ — and when he 
killed it — just like that!” 



Page | 241 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




They were talking about the lesson, Harry thought, as 
though it had been some sort of spectacular show, 
but he hadn’t found it very entertaining — and nor, it 
seemed, had Hermione. 

“Hurry up,” she said tensely to Harry and Ron. 

“Not the ruddy library again?” said Ron. 

“No,” said Hermione curtly, pointing up a side 
passage. “Neville.” 

Neville was standing alone, halfway up the passage, 
staring at the stone wall opposite him with the same 
horrified, wide-eyed look he had worn when Moody 
had demonstrated the Cruciatus Curse. 

“Neville?” Hermione said gently. 

Neville looked around. 

“Oh hello,” he said, his voice much higher than usual. 
“Interesting lesson, wasn’t it? I wonder what’s for 
dinner, I’m — I’m starving, aren’t you?” 

“Neville, are you all right?” said Hermione. 

“Oh yes, I’m fine,” Neville gabbled in the same 
unnaturally high voice. “Very interesting dinner — I 
mean lesson — what’s for eating?” 

Ron gave Harry a startled look. 

“Neville, what — ?” 

But an odd clunking noise sounded behind them, and 
they turned to see Professor Moody limping toward 
them. All four of them fell silent, watching him 



Page | 242 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




apprehensively, but when he spoke, it was in a much 
lower and gentler growl than they had yet heard. 

“It’s all right, sonny,” he said to Neville. “Why don’t 
you come up to my office? Come on . . . we can have a 
cup of tea. ...” 

Neville looked even more frightened at the prospect of 
tea with Moody. He neither moved nor spoke. Moody 
turned his magical eye upon Harry. 

“You all right, are you, Potter?” 

“Yes,” said Harry, almost defiantly. 

Moody’s blue eye quivered slightly in its socket as it 
surveyed Harry. Then he said, “You’ve got to know. It 
seems harsh, maybe, but you’ve got to know. No point 
pretending ... well ... come on, Longbottom, I’ve got 
some books that might interest you.” 

Neville looked pleadingly at Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione, but they didn’t say anything, so Neville 
had no choice but to allow himself to be steered away, 
one of Moody’s gnarled hands on his shoulder. 

“What was that about?” said Ron, watching Neville 
and Moody turn the corner. 

“I don’t know,” said Hermione, looking pensive. 

“Some lesson, though, eh?” said Ron to Harry as they 
set off for the Great Hall. “Fred and George were right, 
weren’t they? He really knows his stuff, Moody, 
doesn’t he? When he did Avada Kedavra, the way that 
spider just died, just snuffed it right — ” 

But Ron fell suddenly silent at the look on Harry’s 
face and didn’t speak again until they reached the 

Page | 243 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Great Hall, when he said he supposed they had better 
make a start on Professor Trelawney’s predictions 
tonight, since they would take hours. 

Hermione did not join in with Harry and Ron’s 
conversation during dinner, but ate furiously fast, 
and then left for the library again. Harry and Ron 
walked back to Gryffindor Tower, and Harry, who had 
been thinking of nothing else all through dinner, now 
raised the subject of the Unforgivable Curses himself. 

“Wouldn’t Moody and Dumbledore be in trouble with 
the Ministry if they knew we’d seen the curses?” 

Harry asked as they approached the Fat Lady. 

“Yeah, probably,” said Ron. “But Dumbledore’s always 
done things his way, hasn’t he, and Moody’s been 
getting in trouble for years, I reckon. Attacks first and 
asks questions later — look at his dustbins. 
Balderdash.” 

The Fat Lady swung forward to reveal the entrance 
hole, and they climbed into the Gryffindor common 
room, which was crowded and noisy. 

“Shall we get our Divination stuff, then?” said Harry. 

“I s’pose,” Ron groaned. 

They went up to the dormitory to fetch their books 
and charts, to find Neville there alone, sitting on his 
bed, reading. He looked a good deal calmer than at 
the end of Moody’s lesson, though still not entirely 
normal. His eyes were rather red. 

“You all right, Neville?” Harry asked him. 

“Oh yes,” said Neville, “I’m fine, thanks. Just reading 
this book Professor Moody lent me. ...” 

Page | 244 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He held up the book: Magical Water Plants of the 
Mediterranean. 

“Apparently, Professor Sprout told Professor Moody 
I’m really good at Herbology,” Neville said. There was 
a faint note of pride in his voice that Harry had rarely 
heard there before. “He thought I’d like this.” 

Telling Neville what Professor Sprout had said, Harry 
thought, had been a very tactful way of cheering 
Neville up, for Neville very rarely heard that he was 
good at anything. It was the sort of thing Professor 
Lupin would have done. 

Harry and Ron took their copies of Unfogging the 
Future back down to the common room, found a 
table, and set to work on their predictions for the 
coming month. An hour later, they had made very 
little progress, though their table was littered with 
bits of parchment bearing sums and symbols, and 
Harry’s brain was as fogged as though it had been 
filled with the fumes from Professor Trelawney’s fire. 

“I haven’t got a clue what this lot’s supposed to 
mean,” he said, staring down at a long list of 
calculations. 

“You know,” said Ron, whose hair was on end 
because of all the times he had run his fingers 
through it in frustration, “I think it’s back to the old 
Divination standby.” 

“What — make it up?” 

“Yeah,” said Ron, sweeping the jumble of scrawled 
notes off the table, dipping his pen into some ink, and 
starting to write. 



Page | 245 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Next Monday,” he said as he scribbled, “I am likely to 
develop a cough, owing to the unlucky conjunction of 
Mars and Jupiter.” He looked up at Harry. “You know 
her — just put in loads of misery, shell lap it up.” 

“Right,” said Harry, crumpling up his first attempt 
and lobbing it over the heads of a group of chattering 
first years into the fire. “Okay ... on Monday, / will be 
in danger of — er — burns.” 

“Yeah, you will be,” said Ron darkly, “we’re seeing the 
skrewts again on Monday. Okay, Tuesday, I’ll ... erm 



“Lose a treasured possession,” said Harry, who was 
flicking through Unfogging the Future for ideas. 

“Good one,” said Ron, copying it down. “Because of 
... erm ... Mercury. Why don’t you get stabbed in the 
back by someone you thought was a friend?” 

“Yeah ... cool ...” said Harry, scribbling it down, 
“because ... Venus is in the twelfth house.” 

“And on Wednesday, I think I’ll come off worst in a 
fight.” 

“Aaah, I was going to have a fight. Okay, I’ll lose a 
bet.” 

“Yeah, you’ll be betting I’ll win my fight. ...” 

They continued to make up predictions (which grew 
steadily more tragic) for another hour, while the 
common room around them slowly emptied as people 
went up to bed. Crookshanks wandered over to them, 
leapt lightly into an empty chair, and stared 
inscrutably at Harry, rather as Hermione might look if 
she knew they weren’t doing their homework properly. 
Page | 246 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Staring around the room, trying to think of a kind of 
misfortune he hadn’t yet used, Harry saw Fred and 
George sitting together against the opposite wall, 
heads together, quills out, poring over a single piece 
of parchment. It was most unusual to see Fred and 
George hidden away in a corner and working silently; 
they usually liked to be in the thick of things and the 
noisy center of attention. There was something 
secretive about the way they were working on the 
piece of parchment, and Harry was reminded of how 
they had sat together writing something back at the 
Burrow. He had thought then that it was another 
order form for Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes, but it didn’t 
look like that this time; if it had been, they would 
surely have let Lee Jordan in on the joke. He 
wondered whether it had anything to do with entering 
the Triwizard Tournament. 

As Harry watched, George shook his head at Fred, 
scratched out something with his quill, and said, in a 
very quiet voice that nevertheless carried across the 
almost deserted room, “No — that sounds like we’re 
accusing him. Got to be careful ...” 

Then George looked over and saw Harry watching 
him. Harry grinned and quickly returned to his 
predictions — he didn’t want George to think he was 
eavesdropping. Shortly after that, the twins rolled up 
their parchment, said good night, and went off to bed. 

Fred and George had been gone ten minutes or so 
when the portrait hole opened and Hermione climbed 
into the common room carrying a sheaf of parchment 
in one hand and a box whose contents rattled as she 
walked in the other. Crookshanks arched his back, 
purring. 

“Hello,” she said, “I’ve just finished!” 



Page | 247 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“So have I!” said Ron triumphantly, throwing down 
his quill. 

Hermione sat down, laid the things she was carrying 
in an empty armchair, and pulled Ron’s predictions 
toward her. 

“Not going to have a very good month, are you?” she 
said sardonically as Crookshanks curled up in her 
lap. 

“Ah well, at least I’m forewarned,” Ron yawned. 

“You seem to be drowning twice,” said Hermione. 

“Oh am I?” said Ron, peering down at his predictions. 
“I’d better change one of them to getting trampled by 
a rampaging hippogriff.” 

“Don’t you think it’s a bit obvious you’ve made these 
up?” said Hermione. 

“How dare you!” said Ron, in mock outrage. “We’ve 
been working like house-elves here!” 

Hermione raised her eyebrows. 

“It’s just an expression,” said Ron hastily. 

Harry laid down his quill too, having just finished 
predicting his own death by decapitation. 

“What’s in the box?” he asked, pointing at it. 

“Funny you should ask,” said Hermione, with a nasty 
look at Ron. She took off the lid and showed them the 
contents. 



Page | 248 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Inside were about fifty badges, all of different colors, 
but all bearing the same letters: S.P.E.W. 

“ ‘Spew?” said Harry, picking up a badge and looking 
at it. “What’s this about?” 

“Not spew,” said Hermione impatiently. “It’s S-P-E-W. 
Stands for the Society for the Promotion of Elfish 
Welfare.” 

“Never heard of it,” said Ron. 

“Well, of course you haven’t,” said Hermione briskly, 
“I’ve only just started it.” 

“Yeah?” said Ron in mild surprise. “How many 
members have you got?” 

“Well — if you two join — three,” said Hermione. 

“And you think we want to walk around wearing 
badges saying ‘spew,’ do you?” said Ron. 

“S-P-E-W!” said Hermione hotly. “I was going to put 
Stop the Outrageous Abuse of Our Fellow Magical 
Creatures and Campaign for a Change in Their Legal 
Status — but it wouldn’t fit. So that’s the heading of 
our manifesto.” 

She brandished the sheaf of parchment at them. 

“I’ve been researching it thoroughly in the library. Elf 
enslavement goes back centuries. I can’t believe no 
one’s done anything about it before now.” 

“Hermione — open your ears,” said Ron loudly. “They. 
Like. It. They like being enslaved!” 



Page | 249 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Our short-term aims,” said Hermione, speaking even 
more loudly than Ron, and acting as though she 
hadn’t heard a word, “are to secure house-elves fair 
wages and working conditions. Our long-term aims 
include changing the law about non-wand use, and 
trying to get an elf into the Department for the 
Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures, because 
they’re shockingly underrepresented.” 

“And how do we do all this?” Harry asked. 

“We start by recruiting members,” said Hermione 
happily. “I thought two Sickles to join — that buys a 
badge — and the proceeds can fund our leaflet 
campaign. You’re treasurer, Ron — I’ve got you a 
collecting tin upstairs — and Harry, you’re secretary, 
so you might want to write down everything I’m 
saying now, as a record of our first meeting.” 

There was a pause in which Hermione beamed at the 
pair of them, and Harry sat, torn between 
exasperation at Hermione and amusement at the look 
on Ron’s face. The silence was broken, not by Ron, 
who in any case looked as though he was temporarily 
dumbstruck, but by a soft tap, tap on the window. 
Harry looked across the now empty common room 
and saw, illuminated by the moonlight, a snowy owl 
perched on the windowsill. 

“Hedwig!” he shouted, and he launched himself out of 
his chair and across the room to pull open the 
window. 

Hedwig flew inside, soared across the room, and 
landed on the table on top of Harry’s predictions. 

“About time!” said Harry, hurrying after her. 



Page | 250 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“She’s got an answer!” said Ron excitedly, pointing at 
the grubby piece of parchment tied to Hedwig’s leg. 

Harry hastily untied it and sat down to read, 
whereupon Hedwig fluttered onto his knee, hooting 
softly. 

“What does it say?” Hermione asked breathlessly. 

The letter was very short, and looked as though it had 
been scrawled in a great hurry. Harry read it aloud: 

Harry — 

I’m flying north immediately. This news about your 
scar is the latest in a series of strange rumors that 
have reached me here. If it hurts again , go straight to 
Dumbledore — they’re saying he’s got Mad-Eye out of 
retirement, which means he’s reading the signs, even if 
no one else is. 

I’ll be in touch soon. My best to Ron and Hermione. 

Keep your eyes open, Harry. 

Sirius 

Harry looked up at Ron and Hermione, who stared 
back at him. 

“He’s flying north?” Hermione whispered. “He’s 
coming back?” 

“Dumbledore’s reading what signs?” said Ron, looking 
perplexed. “Harry — what’s up?” 

For Harry had just hit himself in the forehead with 
his fist, jolting Hedwig out of his lap. 

“I shouldn’t’ve told him!” Harry said furiously. 

Page | 251 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What are you on about?” said Ron in surprise. 



“It’s made him think he’s got to come back!” said 
Harry, now slamming his fist on the table so that 
Hedwig landed on the back of Ron’s chair, hooting 
indignantly. “Coming back, because he thinks I’m in 
trouble! And there’s nothing wrong with me! And I 
haven’t got anything for you,” Harry snapped at 
Hedwig, who was clicking her beak expectantly, 

“you’ll have to go up to the Owlery if you want food.” 

Hedwig gave him an extremely offended look and took 
off for the open window, cuffing him around the head 
with her outstretched wing as she went. 

“Harry,” Hermione began, in a pacifying sort of voice. 

“I’m going to bed,” said Harry shortly. “See you in the 
morning.” 

Upstairs in the dormitory he pulled on his pajamas 
and got into his four-poster, but he didn’t feel 
remotely tired. 

If Sirius came back and got caught, it would be his, 
Harry’s, fault. Why hadn’t he kept his mouth shut? A 
few seconds’ pain and he’d had to blab. ... If he’d just 
had the sense to keep it to himself. . . . 

He heard Ron come up into the dormitory a short 
while later, but did not speak to him. For a long time, 
Harry lay staring up at the dark canopy of his bed. 
The dormitory was completely silent, and, had he 
been less preoccupied, Harry would have realized that 
the absence of Neville’s usual snores meant that he 
was not the only one lying awake. 



Page | 252 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






BEAUXBATONS AND DRUMSTRANG 

Early next morning, Harry woke with a plan fully 
formed in his mind, as though his sleeping brain had 
been working on it all night. He got up, dressed in the 
pale dawn light, left the dormitory without waking 
Ron, and went back down to the deserted common 
room. Here he took a piece of parchment from the 
table upon which his Divination homework still lay 
and wrote the following letter: 

Dear Sirius, 

I reckon I just imagined my scar hurting, I was half 
asleep when I wrote to you last time. There’s no point 
coming back, everything’s fine here. Don’t worry about 
me, my head feels completely normal. 

Harry 

He then climbed out of the portrait hole, up through 
the silent castle (held up only briefly by Peeves, who 
tried to overturn a large vase on him halfway along 



Page | 253 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



the fourth-floor corridor), finally arriving at the 
Owlery, which was situated at the top of West Tower. 

The Owlery was a circular stone room, rather cold 
and drafty, because none of the windows had glass in 
them. The floor was entirely covered in straw, owl 
droppings, and the regurgitated skeletons of mice and 
voles. Hundreds upon hundreds of owls of every 
breed imaginable were nestled here on perches that 
rose right up to the top of the tower, nearly all of 
them asleep, though here and there a round amber 
eye glared at Harry. He spotted Hedwig nestled 
between a barn owl and a tawny, and hurried over to 
her, sliding a little on the dropping-strewn floor. 

It took him a while to persuade her to wake up and 
then to look at him, as she kept shuffling around on 
her perch, showing him her tail. She was evidently 
still furious about his lack of gratitude the previous 
night. In the end, it was Harry suggesting she might 
be too tired, and that perhaps he would ask Ron to 
borrow Pigwidgeon, that made her stick out her leg 
and allow him to tie the letter to it. 

“Just find him, all right?” Harry said, stroking her 
back as he carried her on his arm to one of the holes 
in the wall. “Before the dementors do.” 

She nipped his finger, perhaps rather harder than she 
would ordinarily have done, but hooted softly in a 
reassuring sort of way all the same. Then she spread 
her wings and took off into the sunrise. Harry 
watched her fly out of sight with the familiar feeling of 
unease back in his stomach. He had been so sure 
that Sirius’s reply would alleviate his worries rather 
than increasing them. 

“That was a lie, Harry,” said Hermione sharply over 
breakfast, when he told her and Ron what he had 

Page | 254 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




done. “You didn’t imagine your scar hurting and you 
know it.” 

“So what?” said Harry. “He’s not going back to 
Azkaban because of me.” 

“Drop it,” said Ron sharply to Hermione as she 
opened her mouth to argue some more, and for once, 
Hermione heeded him, and fell silent. 

Harry did his best not to worry about Sirius over the 
next couple of weeks. True, he could not stop himself 
from looking anxiously around every morning when 
the post owls arrived, nor, late at night before he went 
to sleep, prevent himself from seeing horrible visions 
of Sirius, cornered by dementors down some dark 
London street, but betweentimes he tried to keep his 
mind off his godfather. He wished he still had 
Quidditch to distract him; nothing worked so well on 
a troubled mind as a good, hard training session. On 
the other hand, their lessons were becoming more 
difficult and demanding than ever before, particularly 
Moody’s Defense Against the Dark Arts. 

To their surprise, Professor Moody had announced 
that he would be putting the Imperius Curse on each 
of them in turn, to demonstrate its power and to see 
whether they could resist its effects. 

“But — but you said it’s illegal, Professor,” said 
Hermione uncertainly as Moody cleared away the 
desks with a sweep of his wand, leaving a large clear 
space in the middle of the room. “You said — to use it 
against another human was — ” 

“Dumbledore wants you taught what it feels like,” 
said Moody, his magical eye swiveling onto Hermione 
and fixing her with an eerie, unblinking stare. “If 
you’d rather learn the hard way — when someone’s 

Page | 255 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




putting it on you so they can control you completely 
— fine by me. You’re excused. Off you go.” 

He pointed one gnarled finger toward the door. 
Hermione went very pink and muttered something 
about not meaning that she wanted to leave. Harry 
and Ron grinned at each other. They knew Hermione 
would rather eat bubotuber pus than miss such an 
important lesson. 

Moody began to beckon students forward in turn and 
put the Imperius Curse upon them. Harry watched 
as, one by one, his classmates did the most 
extraordinary things under its influence. Dean 
Thomas hopped three times around the room, singing 
the national anthem. Lavender Brown imitated a 
squirrel. Neville performed a series of quite 
astonishing gymnastics he would certainly not have 
been capable of in his normal state. Not one of them 
seemed to be able to fight off the curse, and each of 
them recovered only when Moody had removed it. 

“Potter,” Moody growled, “you next.” 

Harry moved forward into the middle of the 
classroom, into the space that Moody had cleared of 
desks. Moody raised his wand, pointed it at Harry, 
and said, “Imperio\” 

It was the most wonderful feeling. Harry felt a floating 
sensation as every thought and worry in his head was 
wiped gently away, leaving nothing but a vague, 
untraceable happiness. He stood there feeling 
immensely relaxed, only dimly aware of everyone 
watching him. 

And then he heard Mad-Eye Moody’s voice, echoing in 
some distant chamber of his empty brain: Jump onto 
the desk . . . jump onto the desk. . . . 

Page | 256 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry bent his knees obediently, preparing to spring. 
Jump onto the desk. ... 

Why, though? Another voice had awoken in the back 
of his brain. 

Stupid thing to do, really, said the voice. 

Jump onto the desk. ... 

No, I don’t think I will, thanks, said the other voice, a 
little more firmly ... no, I don’t really want to. ... 

Jump\ NOW 

The next thing Harry felt was considerable pain. He 
had both jumped and tried to prevent himself from 
jumping — the result was that he’d smashed 
headlong into the desk, knocking it over, and, by the 
feeling in his legs, fractured both his kneecaps. 

“Now, that’s more like it!” growled Moody’s voice, and 
suddenly, Harry felt the empty, echoing feeling in his 
head disappear. He remembered exactly what was 
happening, and the pain in his knees seemed to 
double. 

“Look at that, you lot ... Potter fought! He fought it, 
and he damn near beat it! We’ll try that again, Potter, 
and the rest of you, pay attention — watch his eyes, 
that’s where you see it — very good, Potter, very good 
indeed! They’ll have trouble controlling you!” 



“The way he talks,” Harry muttered as he hobbled out 
of the Defense Against the Dark Arts class an hour 
later (Moody had insisted on putting Harry through 

Page | 257 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




his paces four times in a row, until Harry could throw 
off the curse entirely), “you’d think we were all going 
to be attacked any second.” 

“Yeah, I know,” said Ron, who was skipping on every 
alternate step. He had had much more difficulty with 
the curse than Harry, though Moody assured him the 
effects would wear off by lunch-time. “Talk about 
paranoid ...” Ron glanced nervously over his shoulder 
to check that Moody was definitely out of earshot and 
went on. “No wonder they were glad to get shot of him 
at the Ministry. Did you hear him telling Seamus 
what he did to that witch who shouted ‘Boo’ behind 
him on April Fools’ Day? And when are we supposed 
to read up on resisting the Imperius Curse with 
everything else we’ve got to do?” 

All the fourth years had noticed a definite increase in 
the amount of work they were required to do this 
term. Professor McGonagall explained why, when the 
class gave a particularly loud groan at the amount of 
Transfiguration homework she had assigned. 

“You are now entering a most important phase of your 
magical education!” she told them, her eyes glinting 
dangerously behind her square spectacles. “Your 
Ordinary Wizarding Levels are drawing closer — ” 

“We don’t take O.W.L.s till fifth year!” said Dean 
Thomas indignantly. 

“Maybe not, Thomas, but believe me, you need all the 
preparation you can get! Miss Granger remains the 
only person in this class who has managed to turn a 
hedgehog into a satisfactory pincushion. I might 
remind you that your pincushion, Thomas, still curls 
up in fright if anyone approaches it with a pin!” 



Page | 258 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione, who had turned rather pink again, seemed 
to be trying not to look too pleased with herself. 

Harry and Ron were deeply amused when Professor 
Trelawney told them that they had received top marks 
for their homework in their next Divination class. She 
read out large portions of their predictions, 
commending them for their unflinching acceptance of 
the horrors in store for them — but they were less 
amused when she asked them to do the same thing 
for the month after next; both of them were running 
out of ideas for catastrophes. 

Meanwhile Professor Binns, the ghost who taught 
History of Magic, had them writing weekly essays on 
the goblin rebellions of the eighteenth century. 
Professor Snape was forcing them to research 
antidotes. They took this one seriously, as he had 
hinted that he might be poisoning one of them before 
Christmas to see if their antidote worked. Professor 
Flitwick had asked them to read three extra books in 
preparation for their lesson on Summoning Charms. 

Even Hagrid was adding to their workload. The Blast- 
Ended Skrewts were growing at a remarkable pace 
given that nobody had yet discovered what they ate. 
Hagrid was delighted, and as part of their “project,” 
suggested that they come down to his hut on 
alternate evenings to observe the skrewts and make 
notes on their extraordinary behavior. 

“I will not,” said Draco Malfoy flatly when Hagrid had 
proposed this with the air of Father Christmas pulling 
an extra- large toy out of his sack. “I see enough of 
these foul things during lessons, thanks.” 

Hagrid ’s smile faded off his face. 



Page | 259 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeh’ll do wha’yer told,” he growled, “or I’ll be takin’ a 
leaf outta Professor Moody’s book. ... I hear yeh made 
a good ferret, Malfoy.” 

The Gryffindors roared with laughter. Malfoy flushed 
with anger, but apparently the memory of Moody’s 
punishment was still sufficiently painful to stop him 
from retorting. Harry, Ron, and Hermione returned to 
the castle at the end of the lesson in high spirits; 
seeing Hagrid put down Malfoy was particularly 
satisfying, especially because Malfoy had done his 
very best to get Hagrid sacked the previous year. 

When they arrived in the entrance hall, they found 
themselves unable to proceed owing to the large 
crowd of students congregated there, all milling 
around a large sign that had been erected at the foot 
of the marble staircase. Ron, the tallest of the three, 
stood on tiptoe to see over the heads in front of them 
and read the sign aloud to the other two: 

TRIWIZARD TOURNAMENT 

The delegations from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang 
will be arriving at 6 o’clock on Friday the 30th of 
October. Lessons will end half an hour early — 

“Brilliant!” said Harry. “It’s Potions last thing on 
Friday! Snape won’t have time to poison us all!” 

Students will return their bags and books to their 
dormitories and assemble in front of the castle to 
greet our guests before the Welcoming Feast. 



“Only a week away!” said Ernie Macmillan of 
Hufflepuff, emerging from the crowd, his eyes 



Page | 260 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




gleaming. “I wonder if Cedric knows? Think 111 go and 
tell him. ...” 



“Cedric?” said Ron blankly as Ernie hurried off. 

“Diggory,” said Harry. “He must be entering the 
tournament.” 

“That idiot, Hogwarts champion?” said Ron as they 
pushed their way through the chattering crowd 
toward the staircase. 

“He’s not an idiot. You just don’t like him because he 
beat Gryffindor at Quidditch,” said Hermione. “I’ve 
heard he’s a really good student — and he’s a 
prefect.” 

She spoke as though this settled the matter. 

“You only like him because he’s handsome,” said Ron 
scathingly. 

“Excuse me, I don’t like people just because they’re 
handsome!” said Hermione indignantly. 

Ron gave a loud false cough, which sounded oddly 
like “Lockhart\” 

The appearance of the sign in the entrance hall had a 
marked effect upon the inhabitants of the castle. 
During the following week, there seemed to be only 
one topic of conversation, no matter where Harry 
went: the Triwizard Tournament. Rumors were flying 
from student to student like highly contagious germs: 
who was going to try for Hogwarts champion, what 
the tournament would involve, how the students from 
Beauxbatons and Durmstrang differed from 
themselves. 

Page | 261 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry noticed too that the castle seemed to be 
undergoing an extra-thorough cleaning. Several grimy 
portraits had been scrubbed, much to the displeasure 
of their subjects, who sat huddled in their frames 
muttering darkly and wincing as they felt their raw 
pink faces. The suits of armor were suddenly 
gleaming and moving without squeaking, and Argus 
Filch, the caretaker, was behaving so ferociously to 
any students who forgot to wipe their shoes that he 
terrified a pair of first-year girls into hysterics. 

Other members of the staff seemed oddly tense too. 

“Longbottom, kindly do not reveal that you can’t even 
perform a simple Switching Spell in front of anyone 
from Durmstrang!” Professor McGonagall barked at 
the end of one particularly difficult lesson, during 
which Neville had accidentally transplanted his own 
ears onto a cactus. 

When they went down to breakfast on the morning of 
the thirtieth of October, they found that the Great 
Hall had been decorated overnight. Enormous silk 
banners hung from the walls, each of them 
representing a Hogwarts House: red with a gold lion 
for Gryffindor, blue with a bronze eagle for 
Ravenclaw, yellow with a black badger for Hufflepuff, 
and green with a silver serpent for Slytherin. Behind 
the teachers’ table, the largest banner of all bore the 
Hogwarts coat of arms: lion, eagle, badger, and snake 
united around a large letter H. 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione sat down beside Fred and 
George at the Gryffindor table. Once again, and most 
unusually, they were sitting apart from everyone else 
and conversing in low voices. Ron led the way over to 
them. 



Page | 262 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s a bummer, all right,” George was saying gloomily 
to Fred. “But if he won’t talk to us in person, we’ll 
have to send him the letter after all. Or we’ll stuff it 
into his hand. He can’t avoid us forever.” 

“Who’s avoiding you?” said Ron, sitting down next to 
them. 

“Wish you would,” said Fred, looking irritated at the 
interruption. 

“What’s a bummer?” Ron asked George. 

“Having a nosy git like you for a brother,” said George. 

“You two got any ideas on the Triwizard Tournament 
yet?” Harry asked. “Thought any more about trying to 
enter?” 

“I asked McGonagall how the champions are chosen 
but she wasn’t telling,” said George bitterly. “She just 
told me to shut up and get on with transfiguring my 
raccoon.” 

“Wonder what the tasks are going to be?” said Ron 
thoughtfully. “You know, I bet we could do them, 
Harry. We’ve done dangerous stuff before. ...” 

“Not in front of a panel of judges, you haven’t,” said 
Fred. “McGonagall says the champions get awarded 
points according to how well they’ve done the tasks.” 

“Who are the judges?” Harry asked. 

“Well, the Heads of the participating schools are 
always on the panel,” said Hermione, and everyone 
looked around at her, rather surprised, “because all 
three of them were injured during the Tournament of 



Page | 263 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




1792, when a cockatrice the champions were 
supposed to be catching went on the rampage.” 

She noticed them all looking at her and said, with her 
usual air of impatience that nobody else had read all 
the books she had, “It’s all in Hogwarts, A History. 
Though, of course, that book’s not entirely reliable. A 
Revised History of Hogwarts would be a more 
accurate title. Or A Highly Biased and Selective 
History of Hogwarts, Which Glosses Over the Nastier 
Aspects of the School.” 

“What are you on about?” said Ron, though Harry 
thought he knew what was coming. 

“ House-elves\” said Hermione, her eyes flashing. “Not 
once, in over a thousand pages, does Hogwarts, A 
History mention that we are all colluding in the 
oppression of a hundred slaves!” 

Harry shook his head and applied himself to his 
scrambled eggs. His and Ron’s lack of enthusiasm 
had done nothing whatsoever to curb Hermione ’s 
determination to pursue justice for house-elves. True, 
both of them had paid two Sickles for a S.P.E.W. 
badge, but they had only done it to keep her quiet. 
Their Sickles had been wasted, however; if anything, 
they seemed to have made Hermione more vociferous. 
She had been badgering Harry and Ron ever since, 
first to wear the badges, then to persuade others to do 
the same, and she had also taken to rattling around 
the Gryffindor common room every evening, cornering 
people and shaking the collecting tin under their 
noses. 

“You do realize that your sheets are changed, your 
fires lit, your classrooms cleaned, and your food 
cooked by a group of magical creatures who are 
unpaid and enslaved?” she kept saying fiercely. 

Page | 264 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Some people, like Neville, had paid up just to stop 
Hermione from glowering at them. A few seemed 
mildly interested in what she had to say, but were 
reluctant to take a more active role in campaigning. 
Many regarded the whole thing as a joke. 

Ron now rolled his eyes at the ceiling, which was 
flooding them all in autumn sunlight, and Fred 
became extremely interested in his bacon (both twins 
had refused to buy a S.P.E.W. badge). George, 
however, leaned in toward Hermione. 

“Listen, have you ever been down in the kitchens, 
Hermione?” 

“No, of course not,” said Hermione curtly, “I hardly 
think students are supposed to — ” 

“Well, we have,” said George, indicating Fred, “loads 
of times, to nick food. And we’ve met them, and 
they’re happy. They think they’ve got the best job in 
the world — ” 

“That’s because they’re uneducated and 
brainwashed!” Hermione began hotly, but her next 
few words were drowned out by the sudden 
whooshing noise from overhead, which announced 
the arrival of the post owls. Harry looked up at once, 
and saw Hedwig soaring toward him. Hermione 
stopped talking abruptly; she and Ron watched 
Hedwig anxiously as she fluttered down onto Harry’s 
shoulder, folded her wings, and held out her leg 
wearily. 

Harry pulled off Sirius’s reply and offered Hedwig his 
bacon rinds, which she ate gratefully. Then, checking 
that Fred and George were safely immersed in further 
discussions about the Tri-wizard Tournament, Harry 



Page | 265 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




read out Sirius’s letter in a whisper to Ron and 
Hermione. 



Nice try, Harry. 

I’m back in the country and well hidden. I want you to 
keep me posted on everything that’s going on at 
Hog warts. Don’t use Hedwig, keep changing owls, and 
don’t worry about me, just watch out for yourself. Don’t 
forget what I said about your scar. 

Sirius 

“Why d’you have to keep changing owls?” Ron asked 
in a low voice. 

“Hedwig’ll attract too much attention,” said Hermione 
at once. “She stands out. A snowy owl that keeps 
returning to wherever he’s hiding ... I mean, they’re 
not native birds, are they?” 

Harry rolled up the letter and slipped it inside his 
robes, wondering whether he felt more or less worried 
than before. He supposed that Sirius managing to get 
back without being caught was something. He 
couldn’t deny either that the idea that Sirius was 
much nearer was reassuring; at least he wouldn’t 
have to wait so long for a response every time he 
wrote. 

“Thanks, Hedwig,” he said, stroking her. She hooted 
sleepily, dipped her beak briefly into his goblet of 
orange juice, then took off again, clearly desperate for 
a good long sleep in the Owlery. 

There was a pleasant feeling of anticipation in the air 
that day. Nobody was very attentive in lessons, being 
much more interested in the arrival that evening of 
the people from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang; even 

Page | 266 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Potions was more bearable than usual, as it was half 
an hour shorter. When the bell rang early, Harry, 

Ron, and Hermione hurried up to Gryffindor Tower, 
deposited their bags and books as they had been 
instructed, pulled on their cloaks, and rushed back 
downstairs into the entrance hall. 

The Heads of Houses were ordering their students 
into lines. 

“Weasley, straighten your hat,” Professor McGonagall 
snapped at Ron. “Miss Patil, take that ridiculous 
thing out of your hair.” 

Parvati scowled and removed a large ornamental 
butterfly from the end of her plait. 

“Follow me, please,” said Professor McGonagall. “First 
years in front ... no pushing. ...” 

They filed down the steps and lined up in front of the 
castle. It was a cold, clear evening; dusk was falling 
and a pale, transparent-looking moon was already 
shining over the Forbidden Forest. Harry, standing 
between Ron and Hermione in the fourth row from 
the front, saw Dennis Creevey positively shivering 
with anticipation among the other first years. 

“Nearly six,” said Ron, checking his watch and then 
staring down the drive that led to the front gates. 
“How d’you reckon they’re coming? The train?” 

“I doubt it,” said Hermione. 

“How, then? Broomsticks?” Harry suggested, looking 
up at the starry sky. 

“I don’t think so ... not from that far away. ...” 



Page | 267 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“A Portkey?” Ron suggested. “Or they could Apparate 
— maybe you’re allowed to do it under seventeen 
wherever they come from?” 

“You can’t Apparate inside the Hogwarts grounds, 
how often do I have to tell you?” said Hermione 
impatiently. 

They scanned the darkening grounds excitedly, but 
nothing was moving; everything was still, silent, and 
quite as usual. Harry was starting to feel cold. He 
wished they’d hurry up. ... Maybe the foreign 
students were preparing a dramatic entrance. ... He 
remembered what Mr. Weasley had said back at the 
campsite before the Quidditch World Cup: “always the 
same — we can’t resist showing off when we get 
together. ...” 

And then Dumbledore called out from the back row 
where he stood with the other teachers — 

“Aha! Unless I am very much mistaken, the delegation 
from Beauxbatons approaches!” 

“Where?” said many students eagerly, all looking in 
different directions. 

“There!” yelled a sixth year, pointing over the forest. 

Something large, much larger than a broomstick — 
or, indeed, a hundred broomsticks — was hurtling 
across the deep blue sky toward the castle, growing 
larger all the time. 

“It’s a dragon!” shrieked one of the first years, losing 
her head completely. 

“Don’t be stupid ... it’s a flying house!” said Dennis 
Creevey. 

Page | 268 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dennis’s guess was closer. ... As the gigantic black 
shape skimmed over the treetops of the Forbidden 
Forest and the lights shining from the castle windows 
hit it, they saw a gigantic, powder-blue, horse-drawn 
carriage, the size of a large house, soaring toward 
them, pulled through the air by a dozen winged 
horses, all palominos, and each the size of an 
elephant. 

The front three rows of students drew backward as 
the carriage hurtled ever lower, coming in to land at a 
tremendous speed — then, with an almighty crash 
that made Neville jump backward onto a Slytherin 
fifth year’s foot, the horses’ hooves, larger than dinner 
plates, hit the ground. A second later, the carriage 
landed too, bouncing upon its vast wheels, while the 
golden horses tossed their enormous heads and rolled 
large, fiery red eyes. 

Harry just had time to see that the door of the 
carriage bore a coat of arms (two crossed, golden 
wands, each emitting three stars) before it opened. 

A boy in pale blue robes jumped down from the 
carriage, bent forward, fumbled for a moment with 
something on the carriage floor, and unfolded a set of 
golden steps. He sprang back respectfully. Then 
Harry saw a shining, high-heeled black shoe emerging 
from the inside of the carriage — a shoe the size of a 
child’s sled — followed, almost immediately, by the 
largest woman he had ever seen in his life. The size of 
the carriage, and of the horses, was immediately 
explained. A few people gasped. 

Harry had only ever seen one person as large as this 
woman in his life, and that was Hagrid; he doubted 
whether there was an inch difference in their heights. 
Yet somehow — maybe simply because he was used 
to Hagrid — this woman (now at the foot of the steps, 
Page | 269 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




and looking around at the waiting, wide-eyed crowd) 
seemed even more unnaturally large. As she stepped 
into the light flooding from the entrance hall, she was 
revealed to have a handsome, olive-skinned face; 
large, black, liquid-looking eyes; and a rather beaky 
nose. Her hair was drawn back in a shining knob at 
the base of her neck. She was dressed from head to 
foot in black satin, and many magnificent opals 
gleamed at her throat and on her thick fingers. 

Dumbledore started to clap; the students, following 
his lead, broke into applause too, many of them 
standing on tiptoe, the better to look at this woman. 

Her face relaxed into a gracious smile and she walked 
forward toward Dumbledore, extending a glittering 
hand. Dumbledore, though tall himself, had barely to 
bend to kiss it. 

“My dear Madame Maxime,” he said. “Welcome to 
Hogwarts.” 

“Dumbly-dorr,” said Madame Maxime in a deep voice. 
“I ’ope I find you well?” 

“In excellent form, I thank you,” said Dumbledore. 

“My pupils,” said Madame Maxime, waving one of her 
enormous hands carelessly behind her. 

Harry, whose attention had been focused completely 
upon Madame Maxime, now noticed that about a 
dozen boys and girls, all, by the look of them, in their 
late teens, had emerged from the carriage and were 
now standing behind Madame Maxime. They were 
shivering, which was unsurprising, given that their 
robes seemed to be made of fine silk, and none of 
them were wearing cloaks. A few had wrapped scarves 
and shawls around their heads. From what Harry 
Page | 270 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




could see of them (they were standing in Madame 
Maxime ’s enormous shadow), they were staring up at 
Hogwarts with apprehensive looks on their faces. 

“ ’As Karkaroff arrived yet?” Madame Maxime asked. 

“He should be here any moment,” said Dumbledore. 
“Would you like to wait here and greet him or would 
you prefer to step inside and warm up a trifle?” 

“Warm up, I think,” said Madame Maxime. “But ze 
’orses — ” 

“Our Care of Magical Creatures teacher will be 
delighted to take care of them,” said Dumbledore, “the 
moment he has returned from dealing with a slight 
situation that has arisen with some of his other — er 
— charges.” 

“Skrewts,” Ron muttered to Harry, grinning. 

“My steeds require — er — forceful ’andling,” said 
Madame Maxime, looking as though she doubted 
whether any Care of Magical Creatures teacher at 
Hogwarts could be up to the job. “Zey are very strong. 



“I assure you that Hagrid will be well up to the job,” 
said Dumbledore, smiling. 

“Very well,” said Madame Maxime, bowing slightly. 
“Will you please inform zis ’Agrid zat ze ’orses drink 
only single-malt whiskey?” 

“It will be attended to,” said Dumbledore, also bowing. 

“Come,” said Madame Maxime imperiously to her 
students, and the Hogwarts crowd parted to allow her 
and her students to pass up the stone steps. 

Page | 271 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“How big d’you reckon Durmstrang’s horses are going 
to be?” Seamus Finnigan said, leaning around 
Lavender and Parvati to address Harry and Ron. 

“Well, if they’re any bigger than this lot, even Hagrid 
won’t be able to handle them,” said Harry. “That’s if 
he hasn’t been attacked by his skrewts. Wonder 
what’s up with them?” 

“Maybe they’ve escaped,” said Ron hopefully. 

“Oh don’t say that,” said Hermione with a shudder. 
“Imagine that lot loose on the grounds. ...” 

They stood, shivering slightly now, waiting for the 
Durmstrang party to arrive. Most people were gazing 
hopefully up at the sky. For a few minutes, the 
silence was broken only by Madame Maxime’s huge 
horses snorting and stamping. But then — 

“Can you hear something?” said Ron suddenly. 

Harry listened; a loud and oddly eerie noise was 
drifting toward them from out of the darkness: a 
muffled rumbling and sucking sound, as though an 
immense vacuum cleaner were moving along a 
riverbed. ... 

“The lake!” yelled Lee Jordan, pointing down at it. 
“Look at the lake!” 

From their position at the top of the lawns 
overlooking the grounds, they had a clear view of the 
smooth black surface of the water — except that the 
surface was suddenly not smooth at all. Some 
disturbance was taking place deep in the center; great 
bubbles were forming on the surface, waves were now 
washing over the muddy banks — and then, out in 
the very middle of the lake, a whirlpool appeared, as if 
Page | 272 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




a giant plug had just been pulled out of the lake’s 
floor. ... 

What seemed to be a long, black pole began to rise 
slowly out of the heart of the whirlpool . . . and then 
Harry saw the rigging. . . . 

“It’s a mast!” he said to Ron and Hermione. 

Slowly, magnificently, the ship rose out of the water, 
gleaming in the moonlight. It had a strangely skeletal 
look about it, as though it were a resurrected wreck, 
and the dim, misty lights shimmering at its portholes 
looked like ghostly eyes. Finally, with a great sloshing 
noise, the ship emerged entirely, bobbing on the 
turbulent water, and began to glide toward the bank. 
A few moments later, they heard the splash of an 
anchor being thrown down in the shallows, and the 
thud of a plank being lowered onto the bank. 

People were disembarking; they could see their 
silhouettes passing the lights in the ship’s portholes. 
All of them, Harry noticed, seemed to be built along 
the lines of Crabbe and Goyle . . . but then, as they 
drew nearer, walking up the lawns into the light 
streaming from the entrance hall, he saw that their 
bulk was really due to the fact that they were wearing 
cloaks of some kind of shaggy, matted fur. But the 
man who was leading them up to the castle was 
wearing furs of a different sort: sleek and silver, like 
his hair. 

“Dumbledore!” he called heartily as he walked up the 
slope. “How are you, my dear fellow, how are you?” 

“Blooming, thank you, Professor Karkaroff,” 
Dumbledore replied. 



Page | 273 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Karkaroff had a fruity, unctuous voice; when he 
stepped into the light pouring from the front doors of 
the castle they saw that he was tall and thin like 
Dumbledore, but his white hair was short, and his 
goatee (finishing in a small curl) did not entirely hide 
his rather weak chin. When he reached Dumbledore, 
he shook hands with both of his own. 

“Dear old Hogwarts,” he said, looking up at the castle 
and smiling; his teeth were rather yellow, and Harry 
noticed that his smile did not extend to his eyes, 
which remained cold and shrewd. “How good it is to 
be here, how good. ... Viktor, come along, into the 
warmth ... you don’t mind, Dumbledore? Viktor has a 
slight head cold. ...” 

Karkaroff beckoned forward one of his students. As 
the boy passed, Harry caught a glimpse of a 
prominent curved nose and thick black eyebrows. He 
didn’t need the punch on the arm Ron gave him, or 
the hiss in his ear, to recognize that profile. 

“Harry — it’s Krum\” 



Page | 274 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




t'fyfflapier- l6 




THE GOBLET OF FIRE 

“I don’t believe it!” Ron said, in a stunned voice, as 
the Hogwarts students filed back up the steps behind 
the party from Durmstrang. “Krum, Harry! Viktor 
Kruml” 

“For heaven’s sake, Ron, he’s only a Quidditch 
player,” said Hermione. 

“Only a Quidditch player?” Ron said, looking at her as 
though he couldn’t believe his ears. “Hermione — he’s 
one of the best Seekers in the world! I had no idea he 
was still at school!” 

As they recrossed the entrance hall with the rest of 
the Hogwarts students heading for the Great Hall, 
Harry saw Lee Jordan jumping up and down on the 
soles of his feet to get a better look at the back of 
Krum’s head. Several sixth-year girls were frantically 
searching their pockets as they walked — 

“Oh I don’t believe it, I haven’t got a single quill on me 

?? 



Page | 275 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“D’you think he’d sign my hat in lipstick?” 



“Really,” Hermione said loftily as they passed the 
girls, now squabbling over the lipstick. 

“I’m getting his autograph if I can,” said Ron. “You 
haven’t got a quill, have you, Harry?” 

“Nope, they’re upstairs in my bag,” said Harry. 

They walked over to the Gryffindor table and sat 
down. Ron took care to sit on the side facing the 
doorway, because Krum and his fellow Durmstrang 
students were still gathered around it, apparently 
unsure about where they should sit. The students 
from Beauxbatons had chosen seats at the Ravenclaw 
table. They were looking around the Great Hall with 
glum expressions on their faces. Three of them were 
still clutching scarves and shawls around their heads. 

“It’s not that cold,” said Hermione defensively. “Why 
didn’t they bring cloaks?” 

“Over here! Come and sit over here!” Ron hissed. 

“Over here! Hermione, budge up, make a space — ” 

“What?” 

“Too late,” said Ron bitterly. 

Viktor Krum and his fellow Durmstrang students had 
settled themselves at the Slytherin table. Harry could 
see Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle looking very smug 
about this. As he watched, Malfoy bent forward to 
speak to Krum. 

“Yeah, that’s right, smarm up to him, Malfoy,” said 
Ron scathingly. “I bet Krum can see right through 
him, though ... bet he gets people fawning over him 

Page | 276 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




all the time. ... Where d’you reckon they’re going to 
sleep? We could offer him a space in our dormitory, 
Harry ... I wouldn’t mind giving him my bed, I could 
kip on a camp bed.” 

Hermione snorted. 

“They look a lot happier than the Beauxbatons lot,” 
said Harry. 

The Durmstrang students were pulling off their heavy 
furs and looking up at the starry black ceiling with 
expressions of interest; a couple of them were picking 
up the golden plates and goblets and examining 
them, apparently impressed. 

Up at the staff table, Filch, the caretaker, was adding 
chairs. He was wearing his moldy old tailcoat in 
honor of the occasion. Harry was surprised to see 
that he added four chairs, two on either side of 
Dumbledore’s. 

“But there are only two extra people,” Harry said. 
“Why’s Filch putting out four chairs, who else is 
coming?” 

“Eh?” said Ron vaguely. He was still staring avidly at 
Krum. 

When all the students had entered the Hall and 
settled down at their House tables, the staff entered, 
filing up to the top table and taking their seats. Last 
in line were Professor Dumbledore, Professor 
Karkaroff, and Madame Maxime. When their 
headmistress appeared, the pupils from Beauxbatons 
leapt to their feet. A few of the Hogwarts students 
laughed. The Beauxbatons party appeared quite 
unembarrassed, however, and did not resume their 
seats until Madame Maxime had sat down on 
Page | 277 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore ’s left-hand side. Dumbledore remained 
standing, and a silence fell over the Great Hall. 

“Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, ghosts and — 
most particularly — guests,” said Dumbledore, 
beaming around at the foreign students. “I have great 
pleasure in welcoming you all to Hogwarts. I hope and 
trust that your stay here will be both comfortable and 
enjoyable.” 

One of the Beauxbatons girls still clutching a muffler 
around her head gave what was unmistakably a 
derisive laugh. 

“No one’s making you stay!” Hermione whispered, 
bristling at her. 

“The tournament will be officially opened at the end of 
the feast,” said Dumbledore. “I now invite you all to 
eat, drink, and make yourselves at home!” 

He sat down, and Harry saw Karkaroff lean forward at 
once and engage him in conversation. 

The plates in front of them filled with food as usual. 
The house-elves in the kitchen seemed to have pulled 
out all the stops; there was a greater variety of dishes 
in front of them than Harry had ever seen, including 
several that were definitely foreign. 

“What’s that?” said Ron, pointing at a large dish of 
some sort of shellfish stew that stood beside a large 
steak-and-kidney pudding. 

“Bouillabaisse,” said Hermione. 

“Bless you,” said Ron. 



Page | 278 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s French,” said Hermione, “I had it on holiday 
summer before last. It’s very nice.” 

“I’ll take your word for it,” said Ron, helping himself 
to black pudding. 

The Great Hall seemed somehow much more crowded 
than usual, even though there were barely twenty 
additional students there; perhaps it was because 
their differently colored uniforms stood out so clearly 
against the black of the Hogwarts’ robes. Now that 
they had removed their furs, the Durmstrang 
students were revealed to be wearing robes of a deep 
bloodred. 

Hagrid sidled into the Hall through a door behind the 
staff table twenty minutes after the start of the feast. 
He slid into his seat at the end and waved at Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione with a very heavily bandaged 
hand. 

“Skrewts doing all right, Hagrid?” Harry called. 

“Thrivin’,” Hagrid called back happily. 

“Yeah, I’ll just bet they are,” said Ron quietly. “Looks 
like they’ve finally found a food they like, doesn’t it? 
Hagrid ’s fingers.” 

At that moment, a voice said, “Excuse me, are you 
wanting ze bouillabaisse?” 

It was the girl from Beauxbatons who had laughed 
during Dumbledore’s speech. She had finally removed 
her muffler. A long sheet of silvery-blonde hair fell 
almost to her waist. She had large, deep blue eyes, 
and very white, even teeth. 



Page | 279 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Ron went purple. He stared up at her, opened his 
mouth to reply, but nothing came out except a faint 
gurgling noise. 

“Yeah, have it,” said Harry, pushing the dish toward 
the girl. 

“You ’ave finished wiz it?” 

“Yeah,” Ron said breathlessly. “Yeah, it was 
excellent.” 

The girl picked up the dish and carried it carefully off 
to the Ravenclaw table. Ron was still goggling at the 
girl as though he had never seen one before. Harry 
started to laugh. The sound seemed to jog Ron back 
to his senses. 

“She’s a veelcd” he said hoarsely to Harry. 

“Of course she isn’t!” said Hermione tartly. “I don’t see 
anyone else gaping at her like an idiot!” 

But she wasn’t entirely right about that. As the girl 
crossed the Hall, many boys’ heads turned, and some 
of them seemed to have become temporarily 
speechless, just like Ron. 

“I’m telling you, that’s not a normal girl!” said Ron, 
leaning sideways so he could keep a clear view of her. 
“They don’t make them like that at Hogwarts!” 

“They make them okay at Hogwarts,” said Harry 
without thinking. Cho happened to be sitting only a 
few places away from the girl with the silvery hair. 

“When you’ve both put your eyes back in,” said 
Hermione briskly, “you’ll be able to see who’s just 
arrived.” 

Page | 280 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




She was pointing up at the staff table. The two 
remaining empty seats had just been filled. Ludo 
Bagman was now sitting on Professor Karkaroff’s 
other side, while Mr. Crouch, Percy’s boss, was next 
to Madame Maxime. 

“What are they doing here?” said Harry in surprise. 

“They organized the Triwizard Tournament, didn’t 
they?” said Hermione. “I suppose they wanted to be 
here to see it start.” 

When the second course arrived they noticed a 
number of unfamiliar desserts too. Ron examined an 
odd sort of pale blancmange closely, then moved it 
carefully a few inches to his right, so that it would be 
clearly visible from the Ravenclaw table. The girl who 
looked like a veela appeared to have eaten enough, 
however, and did not come over to get it. 

Once the golden plates had been wiped clean, 
Dumbledore stood up again. A pleasant sort of 
tension seemed to fill the Hall now. Harry felt a slight 
thrill of excitement, wondering what was coming. 
Several seats down from them, Fred and George were 
leaning forward, staring at Dumbledore with great 
concentration. 

“The moment has come,” said Dumbledore, smiling 
around at the sea of upturned faces. “The Triwizard 
Tournament is about to start. I would like to say a few 
words of explanation before we bring in the casket — ” 

“The what?” Harry muttered. 

Ron shrugged. 

“ — just to clarify the procedure that we will be 
following this year. But first, let me introduce, for 

Page | 281 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




those who do not know them, Mr. Bartemius Crouch, 
Head of the Department of International Magical 
Cooperation” — there was a smattering of polite 
applause — “and Mr. Ludo Bagman, Head of the 
Department of Magical Games and Sports.” 

There was a much louder round of applause for 
Bagman than for Crouch, perhaps because of his 
fame as a Beater, or simply because he looked so 
much more likable. He acknowledged it with a jovial 
wave of his hand. Bartemius Crouch did not smile or 
wave when his name was announced. Remembering 
him in his neat suit at the Quidditch World Cup, 
Harry thought he looked strange in wizard’s robes. 

His toothbrush mustache and severe parting looked 
very odd next to Dumbledore’s long white hair and 
beard. 

“Mr. Bagman and Mr. Crouch have worked tirelessly 
over the last few months on the arrangements for the 
Triwizard Tournament,” Dumbledore continued, “and 
they will be joining myself, Professor Karkaroff, and 
Madame Maxime on the panel that will judge the 
champions’ efforts.” 

At the mention of the word “champions,” the 
attentiveness of the listening students seemed to 
sharpen. Perhaps Dumbledore had noticed their 
sudden stillness, for he smiled as he said, “The 
casket, then, if you please, Mr. Filch.” 

Filch, who had been lurking unnoticed in a far corner 
of the Hall, now approached Dumbledore carrying a 
great wooden chest encrusted with jewels. It looked 
extremely old. A murmur of excited interest rose from 
the watching students; Dennis Creevey actually stood 
on his chair to see it properly, but, being so tiny, his 
head hardly rose above anyone else’s. 



Page | 282 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“The instructions for the tasks the champions will 
face this year have already been examined by Mr. 
Crouch and Mr. Bagman,” said Dumbledore as Filch 
placed the chest carefully on the table before him, 

“and they have made the necessary arrangements for 
each challenge. There will be three tasks, spaced 
throughout the school year, and they will test the 
champions in many different ways . . . their magical 
prowess — their daring — their powers of deduction 
— and, of course, their ability to cope with danger.” 

At this last word, the Hall was filled with a silence so 
absolute that nobody seemed to be breathing. 

“As you know, three champions compete in the 
tournament,” Dumbledore went on calmly, “one from 
each of the participating schools. They will be marked 
on how well they perform each of the Tournament 
tasks and the champion with the highest total after 
task three will win the Triwizard Cup. The champions 
will be chosen by an impartial selector: the Goblet of 
Fire.” 

Dumbledore now took out his wand and tapped three 
times upon the top of the casket. The lid creaked 
slowly open. Dumbledore reached inside it and pulled 
out a large, roughly hewn wooden cup. It would have 
been entirely unremarkable had it not been full to the 
brim with dancing blue-white flames. 

Dumbledore closed the casket and placed the goblet 
carefully on top of it, where it would be clearly visible 
to everyone in the Hall. 

“Anybody wishing to submit themselves as champion 
must write their name and school clearly upon a slip 
of parchment and drop it into the goblet,” said 
Dumbledore. “Aspiring champions have twenty-four 
hours in which to put their names forward. Tomorrow 
Page | 283 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




night, Halloween, the goblet will return the names of 
the three it has judged most worthy to represent their 
schools. The goblet will be placed in the entrance hall 
tonight, where it will be freely accessible to all those 
wishing to compete. 

“To ensure that no underage student yields to 
temptation,” said Dumbledore, “I will be drawing an 
Age Line around the Goblet of Fire once it has been 
placed in the entrance hall. Nobody under the age of 
seventeen will be able to cross this line. 

“Finally, I wish to impress upon any of you wishing to 
compete that this tournament is not to be entered 
into lightly. Once a champion has been selected by 
the Goblet of Fire, he or she is obliged to see the 
tournament through to the end. The placing of your 
name in the goblet constitutes a binding, magical 
contract. There can be no change of heart once you 
have become a champion. Please be very sure, 
therefore, that you are wholeheartedly prepared to 
play before you drop your name into the goblet. Now, 

I think it is time for bed. Good night to you all.” 

“An Age Line!” Fred Weasley said, his eyes glinting, as 
they all made their way across the Hall to the doors 
into the entrance hall. “Well, that should be fooled by 
an Aging Potion, shouldn’t it? And once your name’s 
in that goblet, you’re laughing — it can’t tell whether 
you’re seventeen or not!” 

“But I don’t think anyone under seventeen will stand 
a chance,” said Hermione, “we just haven’t learned 
enough ...” 

“Speak for yourself,” said George shortly. “You’ll try 
and get in, won’t you, Harry?” 



Page | 284 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry thought briefly of Dumbledore ’s insistence that 
nobody under seventeen should submit their name, 
but then the wonderful picture of himself winning the 
Triwizard Tournament filled his mind again. ... He 
wondered how angry Dumbledore would be if 
someone younger than seventeen did find a way to get 
over the Age Line. ... 

“Where is he?” said Ron, who wasn’t listening to a 
word of this conversation, but looking through the 
crowd to see what had become of Krum. “Dumbledore 
didn’t say where the Durmstrang people are sleeping, 
did he?” 

But this query was answered almost instantly; they 
were level with the Slytherin table now, and Karkaroff 
had just bustled up to his students. 

“Back to the ship, then,” he was saying. “Viktor, how 
are you feeling? Did you eat enough? Should I send 
for some mulled wine from the kitchens?” 

Harry saw Krum shake his head as he pulled his furs 
back on. 

“Professor, I vood like some vine,” said one of the 
other Durmstrang boys hopefully. 

“I wasn’t offering it to you, Poliakoff,” snapped 
Karkaroff, his warmly paternal air vanishing in an 
instant. “I notice you have dribbled food all down the 
front of your robes again, disgusting boy — ” 

Karkaroff turned and led his students toward the 
doors, reaching them at exactly the same moment as 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione. Harry stopped to let him 
walk through first. 



Page | 285 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Thank you,” said Karkaroff carelessly, glancing at 
him. 

And then Karkaroff froze. He turned his head back to 
Harry and stared at him as though he couldn’t believe 
his eyes. Behind their headmaster, the students from 
Durmstrang came to a halt too. Karkaroff s eyes 
moved slowly up Harry’s face and fixed upon his scar. 
The Durmstrang students were staring curiously at 
Harry too. Out of the corner of his eye, Harry saw 
comprehension dawn on a few of their faces. The boy 
with food all down his front nudged the girl next to 
him and pointed openly at Harry’s forehead. 

“Yeah, that’s Harry Potter,” said a growling voice from 
behind them. 

Professor Karkaroff spun around. Mad-Eye Moody 
was standing there, leaning heavily on his staff, his 
magical eye glaring unblinkingly at the Durmstrang 
headmaster. 

The color drained from Karkaroff’s face as Harry 
watched. A terrible look of mingled fury and fear came 
over him. 

“You!” he said, staring at Moody as though unsure he 
was really seeing him. 

“Me,” said Moody grimly. “And unless you’ve got 
anything to say to Potter, Karkaroff, you might want 
to move. You’re blocking the doorway.” 

It was true; half the students in the Hall were now 
waiting behind them, looking over one another’s 
shoulders to see what was causing the holdup. 

Without another word, Professor Karkaroff swept his 
students away with him. Moody watched him until he 

Page | 286 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




was out of sight, his magical eye fixed upon his back, 
a look of intense dislike upon his mutilated face. 



As the next day was Saturday, most students would 
normally have breakfasted late. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione, however, were not alone in rising much 
earlier than they usually did on weekends. When they 
went down into the entrance hall, they saw about 
twenty people milling around it, some of them eating 
toast, all examining the Goblet of Fire. It had been 
placed in the center of the hall on the stool that 
normally bore the Sorting Hat. A thin golden line had 
been traced on the floor, forming a circle ten feet 
around it in every direction. 

“Anyone put their name in yet?” Ron asked a third- 
year girl eagerly. 

“All the Durmstrang lot,” she replied. “But I haven’t 
seen anyone from Hogwarts yet.” 

“Bet some of them put it in last night after we’d all 
gone to bed,” said Harry. “I would’ve if it had been me 
... wouldn’t have wanted everyone watching. What if 
the goblet just gobbed you right back out again?” 

Someone laughed behind Harry. Turning, he saw 
Fred, George, and Lee Jordan hurrying down the 
staircase, all three of them looking extremely excited. 

“Done it,” Fred said in a triumphant whisper to Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione. “Just taken it.” 

“What?” said Ron. 

“The Aging Potion, dung brains,” said Fred. 



Page | 287 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“One drop each,” said George, rubbing his hands 
together with glee. “We only need to be a few months 
older.” 



“We’re going to split the thousand Galleons between 
the three of us if one of us wins,” said Lee, grinning 
broadly. 

“I’m not sure this is going to work, you know,” said 
Hermione warningly “I’m sure Dumbledore will have 
thought of this.” 

Fred, George, and Lee ignored her. 

“Ready?” Fred said to the other two, quivering with 
excitement. “C’mon, then — I’ll go first — ” 

Harry watched, fascinated, as Fred pulled a slip of 
parchment out of his pocket bearing the words Fred 
Weasley — Hog warts. Fred walked right up to the 
edge of the line and stood there, rocking on his toes 
like a diver preparing for a fifty-foot drop. Then, with 
the eyes of every person in the entrance hall upon 
him, he took a great breath and stepped over the line. 

For a split second Harry thought it had worked — 
George certainly thought so, for he let out a yell of 
triumph and leapt after Fred — but next moment, 
there was a loud sizzling sound, and both twins were 
hurled out of the golden circle as though they had 
been thrown by an invisible shot-putter. They landed 
painfully, ten feet away on the cold stone floor, and to 
add insult to injury, there was a loud popping noise, 
and both of them sprouted identical long white 
beards. 

The entrance hall rang with laughter. Even Fred and 
George joined in, once they had gotten to their feet 
and taken a good look at each other’s beards. 

Page | 288 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I did warn you,” said a deep, amused voice, and 
everyone turned to see Professor Dumbledore coming 
out of the Great Hall. He surveyed Fred and George, 
his eyes twinkling. “I suggest you both go up to 
Madam Pomfrey. She is already tending to Miss 
Fawcett, of Ravenclaw, and Mr. Summers, of 
Hufflepuff, both of whom decided to age themselves 
up a little too. Though I must say, neither of their 
beards is anything like as fine as yours.” 

Fred and George set off for the hospital wing, 
accompanied by Lee, who was howling with laughter, 
and Harry, Ron, and Hermione, also chortling, went 
in to breakfast. 

The decorations in the Great Hall had changed this 
morning. As it was Halloween, a cloud of live bats was 
fluttering around the enchanted ceiling, while 
hundreds of carved pumpkins leered from every 
corner. Harry led the way over to Dean and Seamus, 
who were discussing those Hogwarts students of 
seventeen or over who might be entering. 

“There’s a rumor going around that Warrington got up 
early and put his name in,” Dean told Harry. “That 
big bloke from Slytherin who looks like a sloth.” 

Harry, who had played Quidditch against Warrington, 
shook his head in disgust. 

“We can’t have a Slytherin champion!” 

“And all the Hufflepuffs are talking about Diggory,” 
said Seamus contemptuously. “But I wouldn’t have 
thought he’d have wanted to risk his good looks.” 

“Listen!” said Hermione suddenly. 



Page | 289 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




People were cheering out in the entrance hall. They all 
swiveled around in their seats and saw Angelina 
Johnson coming into the Hall, grinning in an 
embarrassed sort of way. A tall black girl who played 
Chaser on the Gryffindor Quidditch team, Angelina 
came over to them, sat down, and said, “Well, I’ve 
done it! Just put my name in!” 

“You’re kidding!” said Ron, looking impressed. 

“Are you seventeen, then?” asked Harry. 

“ ’Course she is, can’t see a beard, can you?” said 
Ron. 

“I had my birthday last week,” said Angelina. 

“Well, I’m glad someone from Gryffindor’s entering,” 
said Hermione. “I really hope you get it, Angelina!” 

“Thanks, Hermione,” said Angelina, smiling at her. 

“Yeah, better you than Pretty-Boy Diggory,” said 
Seamus, causing several Hufflepuffs passing their 
table to scowl heavily at him. 

“What’re we going to do today, then?” Ron asked 
Harry and Hermione when they had finished 
breakfast and were leaving the Great Hall. 

“We haven’t been down to visit Hagrid yet,” said 
Harry. 

“Okay,” said Ron, “just as long as he doesn’t ask us to 
donate a few fingers to the skrewts.” 

A look of great excitement suddenly dawned on 
Hermione ’s face. 



Page | 290 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I’ve just realized — I haven’t asked Hagrid to join 
S.P.E.W. yet!” she said brightly. “Wait for me, will 
you, while I nip upstairs and get the badges?” 

“What is it with her?” said Ron, exasperated, as 
Hermione ran away up the marble staircase. 

“Hey, Ron,” said Harry suddenly. “It’s your friend ...” 

The students from Beauxbatons were coming through 
the front doors from the grounds, among them, the 
veela-girl. Those gathered around the Goblet of Fire 
stood back to let them pass, watching eagerly. 

Madame Maxime entered the hall behind her students 
and organized them into a line. One by one, the 
Beauxbatons students stepped across the Age Line 
and dropped their slips of parchment into the blue- 
white flames. As each name entered the fire, it turned 
briefly red and emitted sparks. 

“What d’you reckon’ll happen to the ones who aren’t 
chosen?” Ron muttered to Harry as the veela-girl 
dropped her parchment into the Goblet of Fire. 
“Reckon they’ll go back to school, or hang around to 
watch the tournament?” 

“Dunno,” said Harry. “Hang around, I suppose. ... 
Madame Maxime’s staying to judge, isn’t she?” 

When all the Beauxbatons students had submitted 
their names, Madame Maxime led them back out of 
the hall and out onto the grounds again. 

“Where are they sleeping, then?” said Ron, moving 
toward the front doors and staring after them. 



Page | 291 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




A loud rattling noise behind them announced 
Hermione’s reappearance with the box of S.P.E.W. 
badges. 

“Oh good, hurry up,” said Ron, and he jumped down 
the stone steps, keeping his eyes on the back of the 
veela-girl, who was now halfway across the lawn with 
Madame Maxime. 

As they neared Hagrid’s cabin on the edge of the 
Forbidden Forest, the mystery of the Beauxbatons’ 
sleeping quarters was solved. The gigantic powder- 
blue carriage in which they had arrived had been 
parked two hundred yards from Hagrid’s front door, 
and the students were climbing back inside it. The 
elephantine flying horses that had pulled the carriage 
were now grazing in a makeshift paddock alongside it. 

Harry knocked on Hagrid’s door, and Fang’s booming 
barks answered instantly 

“ ’Bout time!” said Hagrid, when he’d flung open the 
door. “Thought you lot’d forgotten where I live!” 

“We’ve been really busy, Hag — ” Hermione started to 
say, but then she stopped dead, looking up at Hagrid, 
apparently lost for words. 

Hagrid was wearing his best (and very horrible) hairy 
brown suit, plus a checked yellow-and-orange tie. 

This wasn’t the worst of it, though; he had evidently 
tried to tame his hair, using large quantities of what 
appeared to be axle grease. It was now slicked down 
into two bunches — perhaps he had tried a ponytail 
like Bill’s, but found he had too much hair. The look 
didn’t really suit Hagrid at all. For a moment, 
Hermione goggled at him, then, obviously deciding 
not to comment, she said, “Erm — where are the 
skrewts?” 

Page | 292 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Out by the pumpkin patch,” said Hagrid happily. 
“They’re gettin’ massive, mus’ be nearly three foot 
long now. On’y trouble is, they’ve started killin’ each 
other.” 

“Oh no, really?” said Hermione, shooting a repressive 
look at Ron, who, staring at Hagrid’s odd hairstyle, 
had just opened his mouth to say something about it. 

“Yeah,” said Hagrid sadly. “ ’S’ okay, though, I’ve got 
’em in separate boxes now. Still got abou’ twenty.” 

“Well, that’s lucky,” said Ron. Hagrid missed the 
sarcasm. 

Hagrid’s cabin comprised a single room, in one corner 
of which was a gigantic bed covered in a patchwork 
quilt. A similarly enormous wooden table and chairs 
stood in front of the fire beneath the quantity of cured 
hams and dead birds hanging from the ceiling. They 
sat down at the table while Hagrid started to make 
tea, and were soon immersed in yet more discussion 
of the Triwizard Tournament. Hagrid seemed quite as 
excited about it as they were. 

“You wait,” he said, grinning. “You jus’ wait. Yer going 
ter see some stuff yeh’ve never seen before. Firs’ task 
... ah, but I’m not supposed ter say.” 

“Go on, Hagrid!” Harry, Ron, and Hermione urged 
him, but he just shook his head, grinning. 

“I don’ want ter spoil it fer yeh,” said Hagrid. “But it’s 
gonna be spectacular, I’ll tell yeh that. Them 
champions ’re going ter have their work cut out. Never 
thought I’d live ter see the Triwizard Tournament 
played again!” 



Page | 293 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




They ended up having lunch with Hagrid, though they 
didn’t eat much — Hagrid had made what he said was 
a beef casserole, but after Hermione unearthed a 
large talon in hers, she, Harry, and Ron rather lost 
their appetites. However, they enjoyed themselves 
trying to make Hagrid tell them what the tasks in the 
tournament were going to be, speculating which of 
the entrants were likely to be selected as champions, 
and wondering whether Fred and George were 
beardless yet. 

A light rain had started to fall by midafternoon; it was 
very cozy sitting by the fire, listening to the gentle 
patter of the drops on the window, watching Hagrid 
darning his socks and arguing with Hermione about 
house-elves — for he flatly refused to join S.P.E.W. 
when she showed him her badges. 

“It’d be doin’ ’em an unkindness, Hermione,” he said 
gravely, threading a massive bone needle with thick 
yellow yarn. “It’s in their nature ter look after 
humans, that’s what they like, see? Yeh’d be makin’ 
’em unhappy ter take away their work, an’ insultin’ 
’em if yeh tried ter pay ’em.” 

“But Harry set Dobby free, and he was over the moon 
about it!” said Hermione. “And we heard he’s asking 
for wages now!” 

“Yeah, well, yeh get weirdos in every breed. I’m not 
sayin’ there isn’t the odd elf who’d take freedom, but 
yeh’ll never persuade most of ’em ter do it — no, 
nothin’ doin’, Hermione.” 

Hermione looked very cross indeed and stuffed her 
box of badges back into her cloak pocket. 

By half past five it was growing dark, and Ron, Harry, 
and Hermione decided it was time to get back up to 

Page | 294 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the castle for the Halloween feast — and, more 
important, the announcement of the school 
champions. 

“I’ll come with yeh,” said Hagrid, putting away his 
darning. “Jus’ give us a sec.” 

Hagrid got up, went across to the chest of drawers 
beside his bed, and began searching for something 
inside it. They didn’t pay too much attention until a 
truly horrible smell reached their nostrils. Coughing, 
Ron said, “Hagrid, what’s that?” 

“Eh?” said Hagrid, turning around with a large bottle 
in his hand. “Don’ yeh like it?” 

“Is that aftershave?” said Hermione in a slightly 
choked voice. 

“Er — eau de cologne,” Hagrid muttered. He was 
blushing. “Maybe it’s a bit much,” he said gruffly. “I’ll 
go take it off, hang on . . . 

He stumped out of the cabin, and they saw him 
washing himself vigorously in the water barrel outside 
the window. 

“Eau de cologne?” said Hermione in amazement. 
“Hagrid?” 

“And what’s with the hair and the suit?” said Harry in 
an undertone. 

“Look!” said Ron suddenly, pointing out of the 
window. 

Hagrid had just straightened up and turned ’round. If 
he had been blushing before, it was nothing to what 
he was doing now. Getting to their feet very 

Page | 295 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




cautiously, so that Hagrid wouldn’t spot them, Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione peered through the window and 
saw that Madame Maxime and the Beauxbatons 
students had just emerged from their carriage, clearly 
about to set off for the feast too. They couldn’t hear 
what Hagrid was saying, but he was talking to 
Madame Maxime with a rapt, misty-eyed expression 
Harry had only ever seen him wear once before — 
when he had been looking at the baby dragon, 

Norbert. 

“He’s going up to the castle with her!” said Hermione 
indignantly. “I thought he was waiting for us!” 

Without so much as a backward glance at his cabin, 
Hagrid was trudging off up the grounds with Madame 
Maxime, the Beauxbatons students following in their 
wake, jogging to keep up with their enormous strides. 

“He fancies her!” said Ron incredulously. “Well, if they 
end up having children, they’ll be setting a world 
record — bet any baby of theirs would weigh about a 
ton.” 

They let themselves out of the cabin and shut the 
door behind them. It was surprisingly dark outside. 
Drawing their cloaks more closely around themselves, 
they set off up the sloping lawns. 

“Ooh it’s them, look!” Hermione whispered. 

The Durmstrang party was walking up toward the 
castle from the lake. Viktor Krum was walking side by 
side with Karkaroff, and the other Durmstrang 
students were straggling along behind them. Ron 
watched Krum excitedly, but Krum did not look 
around as he reached the front doors a little ahead of 
Hermione, Ron, and Harry and proceeded through 
them. 

Page | 296 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




When they entered the candlelit Great Hall it was 
almost full. The Goblet of Fire had been moved; it was 
now standing in front of Dumbledore ’s empty chair at 
the teachers’ table. Fred and George — clean-shaven 
again — seemed to have taken their disappointment 
fairly well. 

“Hope it’s Angelina,” said Fred as Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione sat down. 

“So do I!” said Hermione breathlessly. “Well, we’ll 
soon know!” 

The Halloween feast seemed to take much longer than 
usual. Perhaps because it was their second feast in 
two days, Harry didn’t seem to fancy the 
extravagantly prepared food as much as he would 
have normally. Like everyone else in the Hall, judging 
by the constantly craning necks, the impatient 
expressions on every face, the fidgeting, and the 
standing up to see whether Dumbledore had finished 
eating yet, Harry simply wanted the plates to clear, 
and to hear who had been selected as champions. 

At long last, the golden plates returned to their 
original spotless state; there was a sharp upswing in 
the level of noise within the Hall, which died away 
almost instantly as Dumbledore got to his feet. On 
either side of him, Professor Karkaroff and Madame 
Maxime looked as tense and expectant as anyone. 
Ludo Bagman was beaming and winking at various 
students. Mr. Crouch, however, looked quite 
uninterested, almost bored. 

“Well, the goblet is almost ready to make its decision,” 
said Dumbledore. “I estimate that it requires one 
more minute. Now, when the champions’ names are 
called, I would ask them please to come up to the top 
of the Hall, walk along the staff table, and go through 
Page | 297 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




into the next chamber” — he indicated the door 
behind the staff table — “where they will be receiving 
their first instructions.” 

He took out his wand and gave a great sweeping wave 
with it; at once, all the candles except those inside the 
carved pumpkins were extinguished, plunging them 
into a state of semidarkness. The Goblet of Fire now 
shone more brightly than anything in the whole Hall, 
the sparkling bright, bluey-whiteness of the flames 
almost painful on the eyes. Everyone watched, 
waiting. ... A few people kept checking their watches. 



“Any second,” Lee Jordan whispered, two seats away 
from Harry. 

The flames inside the goblet turned suddenly red 
again. Sparks began to fly from it. Next moment, a 
tongue of flame shot into the air, a charred piece of 
parchment fluttered out of it — the whole room 
gasped. 

Dumbledore caught the piece of parchment and held 
it at arm’s length, so that he could read it by the light 
of the flames, which had turned back to blue-white. 

“The champion for Durmstrang,” he read, in a strong, 
clear voice, “will be Viktor Krum.” 

“No surprises there!” yelled Ron as a storm of 
applause and cheering swept the Hall. Harry saw 
Viktor Krum rise from the Slytherin table and slouch 
up toward Dumbledore; he turned right, walked along 
the staff table, and disappeared through the door into 
the next chamber. 



Page | 298 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Bravo, Viktor!” boomed Karkaroff, so loudly that 
everyone could hear him, even over all the applause. 
“Knew you had it in you!” 

The clapping and chatting died down. Now everyone’s 
attention was focused again on the goblet, which, 
seconds later, turned red once more. A second piece 
of parchment shot out of it, propelled by the flames. 

“The champion for Beauxbatons,” said Dumbledore, 

“is Fleur Delacour!” 

“It’s her, Ron!” Harry shouted as the girl who so 
resembled a veela got gracefully to her feet, shook 
back her sheet of silvery blonde hair, and swept up 
between the Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff tables. 

“Oh look, they’re all disappointed,” Hermione said 
over the noise, nodding toward the remainder of the 
Beauxbatons party. “Disappointed” was a bit of an 
understatement, Harry thought. Two of the girls who 
had not been selected had dissolved into tears and 
were sobbing with their heads on their arms. 

When Fleur Delacour too had vanished into the side 
chamber, silence fell again, but this time it was a 
silence so stiff with excitement you could almost taste 
it. The Hogwarts champion next ... 

And the Goblet of Fire turned red once more; sparks 
showered out of it; the tongue of flame shot high into 
the air, and from its tip Dumbledore pulled the third 
piece of parchment. 

“The Hogwarts champion,” he called, “is Cedric 
Diggory!” 

“No!” said Ron loudly, but nobody heard him except 
Harry; the uproar from the next table was too great. 

Page | 299 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Every single Hufflepuff had jumped to his or her feet, 
screaming and stamping, as Cedric made his way 
past them, grinning broadly, and headed off toward 
the chamber behind the teachers’ table. Indeed, the 
applause for Cedric went on so long that it was some 
time before Dumbledore could make himself heard 
again. 

“Excellent!” Dumbledore called happily as at last the 
tumult died down. “Well, we now have our three 
champions. I am sure I can count upon all of you, 
including the remaining students from Beauxbatons 
and Durmstrang, to give your champions every ounce 
of support you can muster. By cheering your 
champion on, you will contribute in a very real — ” 

But Dumbledore suddenly stopped speaking, and it 
was apparent to everybody what had distracted him. 

The fire in the goblet had just turned red again. 
Sparks were flying out of it. A long flame shot 
suddenly into the air, and borne upon it was another 
piece of parchment. 

Automatically, it seemed, Dumbledore reached out a 
long hand and seized the parchment. He held it out 
and stared at the name written upon it. There was a 
long pause, during which Dumbledore stared at the 
slip in his hands, and everyone in the room stared at 
Dumbledore. And then Dumbledore cleared his throat 
and read out — 

“ Harry Potter.” 



Page | 300 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 





THE FOUR CHAMPIONS 

Harry sat there, aware that every head in the Great 
Hall had turned to look at him. He was stunned. He 
felt numb. He was surely dreaming. He had not heard 
correctly. 

There was no applause. A buzzing, as though of angry 
bees, was starting to fill the Hall; some students were 
standing up to get a better look at Harry as he sat, 
frozen, in his seat. 

Up at the top table, Professor McGonagall had got to 
her feet and swept past Ludo Bagman and Professor 
Karkaroff to whisper urgently to Professor 
Dumbledore, who bent his ear toward her, frowning 
slightly. 

Harry turned to Ron and Hermione; beyond them, he 
saw the long Gryffindor table all watching him, 
openmouthed. 

“I didn’t put my name in,” Harry said blankly. “You 
know I didn’t.” 

Page | 301 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



Both of them stared just as blankly back. 

At the top table, Professor Dumbledore had 
straightened up, nodding to Professor McGonagall. 

“Harry Potter!” he called again. “Harry! Up here, if you 
please!” 

“Go on,” Hermione whispered, giving Harry a slight 
push. 

Harry got to his feet, trod on the hem of his robes, 
and stumbled slightly. He set off up the gap between 
the Gryffindor and Hufflepuff tables. It felt like an 
immensely long walk; the top table didn’t seem to be 
getting any nearer at all, and he could feel hundreds 
and hundreds of eyes upon him, as though each were 
a searchlight. The buzzing grew louder and louder. 
After what seemed like an hour, he was right in front 
of Dumbledore, feeling the stares of all the teachers 
upon him. 

“Well ... through the door, Harry,” said Dumbledore. 
He wasn’t smiling. 

Harry moved off along the teachers’ table. Hagrid was 
seated right at the end. He did not wink at Harry, or 
wave, or give any of his usual signs of greeting. He 
looked completely astonished and stared at Harry as 
he passed like everyone else. Harry went through the 
door out of the Great Hall and found himself in a 
smaller room, lined with paintings of witches and 
wizards. A handsome fire was roaring in the fireplace 
opposite him. 

The faces in the portraits turned to look at him as he 
entered. He saw a wizened witch flit out of the frame 
of her picture and into the one next to it, which 



Page | 302 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




contained a wizard with a walrus mustache. The 
wizened witch started whispering in his ear. 

Viktor Krum, Cedric Diggory, and Fleur Delacour 
were grouped around the fire. They looked strangely 
impressive, silhouetted against the flames. Krum, 
hunched-up and brooding, was leaning against the 
mantelpiece, slightly apart from the other two. Cedric 
was standing with his hands behind his back, staring 
into the fire. Fleur Delacour looked around when 
Harry walked in and threw back her sheet of long, 
silvery hair. 

“What is it?” she said. “Do zey want us back in ze 
Hall?” 

She thought he had come to deliver a message. Harry 
didn’t know how to explain what had just happened. 
He just stood there, looking at the three champions. It 
struck him how very tall all of them were. 

There was a sound of scurrying feet behind him, and 
Ludo Bagman entered the room. He took Harry by the 
arm and led him forward. 

“Extraordinary!” he muttered, squeezing Harry’s arm. 
“Absolutely extraordinary! Gentlemen ... lady,” he 
added, approaching the fireside and addressing the 
other three. “May I introduce — incredible though it 
may seem — the fourth Triwizard champion?” 

Viktor Krum straightened up. His surly face darkened 
as he surveyed Harry. Cedric looked nonplussed. He 
looked from Bagman to Harry and back again as 
though sure he must have misheard what Bagman 
had said. Fleur Delacour, however, tossed her hair, 
smiling, and said, “Oh, vairy funny joke, Meester 
Bagman.” 



Page | 303 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Joke?” Bagman repeated, bewildered. “No, no, not at 
all! Harry’s name just came out of the Goblet of Fire!” 

Krum’s thick eyebrows contracted slightly. Cedric was 
still looking politely bewildered. Fleur frowned. 

“But evidently zair ’as been a mistake,” she said 
contemptuously to Bagman. “ ’E cannot compete. ’E is 
too young.” 

“Well ... it is amazing,” said Bagman, rubbing his 
smooth chin and smiling down at Harry. “But, as you 
know, the age restriction was only imposed this year 
as an extra safety measure. And as his name’s come 
out of the goblet ... I mean, I don’t think there can be 
any ducking out at this stage. ... It’s down in the 
rules, you’re obliged ... Harry will just have to do the 
best he — ” 

The door behind them opened again, and a large 
group of people came in: Professor Dumbledore, 
followed closely by Mr. Crouch, Professor Karkaroff, 
Madame Maxime, Professor McGonagall, and 
Professor Snape. Harry heard the buzzing of the 
hundreds of students on the other side of the wall, 
before Professor McGonagall closed the door. 

“Madame Maxime!” said Fleur at once, striding over to 
her headmistress. “Zey are saying zat zis little boy is 
to compete also!” 

Somewhere under Harry’s numb disbelief he felt a 
ripple of anger. Little boy ? 

Madame Maxime had drawn herself up to her full, 
and considerable, height. The top of her handsome 
head brushed the candle-filled chandelier, and her 
gigantic black-satin bosom swelled. 



Page | 304 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What is ze meaning of zis, Dumbly-dorr?” she said 
imperiously. 

“I’d rather like to know that myself, Dumbledore,” 
said Professor Karkaroff. He was wearing a steely 
smile, and his blue eyes were like chips of ice. “Two 
Hogwarts champions? I don’t remember anyone 
telling me the host school is allowed two champions 
— or have I not read the rules carefully enough?” 

He gave a short and nasty laugh. 

“C’est impossible,” said Madame Maxime, whose 
enormous hand with its many superb opals was 
resting upon Fleur’s shoulder. “ ’Ogwarts cannot ’ave 
two champions. It is most injust.” 

“We were under the impression that your Age Line 
would keep out younger contestants, Dumbledore,” 
said Karkaroff, his steely smile still in place, though 
his eyes were colder than ever. “Otherwise, we would, 
of course, have brought along a wider selection of 
candidates from our own schools.” 

“It’s no one’s fault but Potter’s, Karkaroff,” said Snape 
softly. His black eyes were alight with malice. “Don’t 
go blaming Dumbledore for Potter’s determination to 
break rules. He has been crossing lines ever since he 
arrived here — ” 

“Thank you, Severus,” said Dumbledore firmly, and 
Snape went quiet, though his eyes still glinted 
malevolently through his curtain of greasy black hair. 

Professor Dumbledore was now looking down at 
Harry, who looked right back at him, trying to discern 
the expression of the eyes behind the half-moon 
spectacles. 



Page | 305 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Did you put your name into the Goblet of Fire, 
Harry?” he asked calmly. 

“No,” said Harry. He was very aware of everybody 
watching him closely. Snape made a soft noise of 
impatient disbelief in the shadows. 

“Did you ask an older student to put it into the Goblet 
of Fire for you?” said Professor Dumbledore, ignoring 
Snape. 

“No,” said Harry vehemently. 

“Ah, but of course ’e is lying!” cried Madame Maxime. 
Snape was now shaking his head, his lip curling. 

“He could not have crossed the Age Line,” said 
Professor McGonagall sharply. “I am sure we are all 
agreed on that — ” 

“Dumbly-dorr must ’ave made a mistake wiz ze line,” 
said Madame Maxime, shrugging. 

“It is possible, of course,” said Dumbledore politely 

“Dumbledore, you know perfectly well you did not 
make a mistake!” said Professor McGonagall angrily. 
“Really, what nonsense! Harry could not have crossed 
the line himself, and as Professor Dumbledore 
believes that he did not persuade an older student to 
do it for him, I’m sure that should be good enough for 
everybody else!” 

She shot a very angry look at Professor Snape. 

“Mr. Crouch ... Mr. Bagman,” said Karkaroff, his voice 
unctuous once more, “you are our — er — objective 
judges. Surely you will agree that this is most 
irregular?” 

Page | 306 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Bagman wiped his round, boyish face with his 
handkerchief and looked at Mr. Crouch, who was 
standing outside the circle of the firelight, his face 
half hidden in shadow. He looked slightly eerie, the 
half darkness making him look much older, giving 
him an almost skull-like appearance. When he spoke, 
however, it was in his usual curt voice. 

“We must follow the rules, and the rules state clearly 
that those people whose names come out of the 
Goblet of Fire are bound to compete in the 
tournament.” 

“Well, Barty knows the rule book back to front,” said 
Bagman, beaming and turning back to Karkaroff and 
Madame Maxime, as though the matter was now 
closed. 

“I insist upon resubmitting the names of the rest of 
my students,” said Karkaroff. He had dropped his 
unctuous tone and his smile now. His face wore a 
very ugly look indeed. “You will set up the Goblet of 
Fire once more, and we will continue adding names 
until each school has two champions. It’s only fair, 
Dumbledore.” 

“But Karkaroff, it doesn’t work like that,” said 
Bagman. “The Goblet of Fire’s just gone out — it won’t 
reignite until the start of the next tournament — ” 

“ — in which Durmstrang will most certainly not be 
competing!” exploded Karkaroff. “After all our 
meetings and negotiations and compromises, I little 
expected something of this nature to occur! I have 
half a mind to leave now!” 

“Empty threat, Karkaroff,” growled a voice from near 
the door. “You can’t leave your champion now. He’s 
got to compete. They’ve all got to compete. Binding 

Page | 307 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




magical contract, like Dumbledore said. Convenient, 
eh?” 



Moody had just entered the room. He limped toward 
the fire, and with every right step he took, there was a 
loud clunk. 

“Convenient?” said Karkaroff. “I’m afraid I don’t 
understand you, Moody.” 

Harry could tell he was trying to sound disdainful, as 
though what Moody was saying was barely worth his 
notice, but his hands gave him away; they had balled 
themselves into fists. 

“Don’t you?” said Moody quietly. “It’s very simple, 
Karkaroff. Someone put Potter’s name in that goblet 
knowing he’d have to compete if it came out.” 

“Evidently, someone ’oo wished to give ’Ogwarts two 
bites at ze apple!” said Madame Maxime. 

“I quite agree, Madame Maxime,” said Karkaroff, 
bowing to her. “I shall be lodging complaints with the 
Ministry of Magic and the International Confederation 
of Wizards — ” 

“If anyone’s got reason to complain, it’s Potter,” 
growled Moody, “but ... funny thing ... I don’t hear 
him saying a word. ...” 

“Why should ’e complain?” burst out Fleur Delacour, 
stamping her foot. “ ’E ’as ze chance to compete, ’asn’t 
’e? We ’ave all been ’oping to be chosen for weeks and 
weeks! Ze honor for our schools! A thousand Galleons 
in prize money — zis is a chance many would die for!” 

“Maybe someone’s hoping Potter is going to die for it,” 
said Moody, with the merest trace of a growl. 

Page | 308 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




An extremely tense silence followed these words. Ludo 
Bagman, who was looking very anxious indeed, 
bounced nervously up and down on his feet and said, 
“Moody, old man ... what a thing to say!” 

“We all know Professor Moody considers the morning 
wasted if he hasn’t discovered six plots to murder him 
before lunchtime,” said Karkaroff loudly. “Apparently 
he is now teaching his students to fear assassination 
too. An odd quality in a Defense Against the Dark 
Arts teacher, Dumbledore, but no doubt you had your 
reasons.” 

“Imagining things, am I?” growled Moody. “Seeing 
things, eh? It was a skilled witch or wizard who put 
the boy’s name in that goblet. ...” 

“Ah, what evidence is zere of zat?” said Madame 
Maxime, throwing up her huge hands. 

“Because they hoodwinked a very powerful magical 
object!” said Moody. “It would have needed an 
exceptionally strong Confundus Charm to bamboozle 
that goblet into forgetting that only three schools 
compete in the tournament. ... I’m guessing they 
submitted Potter’s name under a fourth school, to 
make sure he was the only one in his category. ...” 

“You seem to have given this a great deal of thought, 
Moody,” said Karkaroff coldly, “and a very ingenious 
theory it is — though of course, I heard you recently 
got it into your head that one of your birthday 
presents contained a cunningly disguised basilisk 
egg, and smashed it to pieces before realizing it was a 
carriage clock. So you’ll understand if we don’t take 
you entirely seriously. ...” 

“There are those who’ll turn innocent occasions to 
their advantage,” Moody retorted in a menacing voice. 

Page | 309 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s my job to think the way Dark wizards do, 
Karkaroff — as you ought to remember. ...” 

“Alas tor!” said Dumbledore warningly. Harry 
wondered for a moment whom he was speaking to, 
but then realized “Mad-Eye” could hardly be Moody’s 
real first name. Moody fell silent, though still 
surveying Karkaroff with satisfaction — Karkaroff’s 
face was burning. 

“How this situation arose, we do not know,” said 
Dumbledore, speaking to everyone gathered in the 
room. “It seems to me, however, that we have no 
choice but to accept it. Both Cedric and Harry have 
been chosen to compete in the Tournament. This, 
therefore, they will do. ...” 

“Ah, but Dumbly-dorr — ” 

“My dear Madame Maxime, if you have an alternative, 

I would be delighted to hear it.” 

Dumbledore waited, but Madame Maxime did not 
speak, she merely glared. She wasn’t the only one 
either. Snape looked furious; Karkaroff livid; Bagman, 
however, looked rather excited. 

“Well, shall we crack on, then?” he said, rubbing his 
hands together and smiling around the room. “Got to 
give our champions their instructions, haven’t we? 
Barty, want to do the honors?” 

Mr. Crouch seemed to come out of a deep reverie. 

“Yes,” he said, “instructions. Yes ... the first task ...” 

He moved forward into the firelight. Close up, Harry 
thought he looked ill. There were dark shadows 
beneath his eyes and a thin, papery look about his 

Page | 310 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




wrinkled skin that had not been there at the 
Quidditch World Cup. 

“The first task is designed to test your daring,” he told 
Harry, Cedric, Fleur, and Viktor, “so we are not going 
to be telling you what it is. Courage in the face of the 
unknown is an important quality in a wizard . . . very 
important. ... 

“The first task will take place on November the 
twenty-fourth, in front of the other students and the 
panel of judges. 

“The champions are not permitted to ask for or accept 
help of any kind from their teachers to complete the 
tasks in the tournament. The champions will face the 
first challenge armed only with their wands. They will 
receive information about the second task when the 
first is over. Owing to the demanding and time- 
consuming nature of the tournament, the champions 
are exempted from end-of-year tests.” 

Mr. Crouch turned to look at Dumbledore. 

“I think that’s all, is it, Albus?” 

“I think so,” said Dumbledore, who was looking at Mr. 
Crouch with mild concern. “Are you sure you 
wouldn’t like to stay at Hogwarts tonight, Barty?” 

“No, Dumbledore, I must get back to the Ministry,” 
said Mr. Crouch. “It is a very busy, very difficult time 
at the moment. ... I’ve left young Weatherby in 
charge. ... Very enthusiastic ... a little 
overenthusiastic, if truth be told. ...” 

“You’ll come and have a drink before you go, at 
least?” said Dumbledore. 



Page | 311 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Come on, Barty, I’m staying!” said Bagman brightly. 
“It’s all happening at Hogwarts now, you know, much 
more exciting here than at the office!” 

“I think not, Ludo,” said Crouch with a touch of his 
old impatience. 

“Professor Karkaroff — Madame Maxime — a 
nightcap?” said Dumbledore. 

But Madame Maxime had already put her arm 
around Fleur’s shoulders and was leading her swiftly 
out of the room. Harry could hear them both talking 
very fast in French as they went off into the Great 
Hall. Karkaroff beckoned to Krum, and they, too, 
exited, though in silence. 

“Harry, Cedric, I suggest you go up to bed,” said 
Dumbledore, smiling at both of them. “I am sure 
Gryffindor and Hufflepuff are waiting to celebrate with 
you, and it would be a shame to deprive them of this 
excellent excuse to make a great deal of mess and 
noise.” 

Harry glanced at Cedric, who nodded, and they left 
together. 

The Great Hall was deserted now; the candles had 
burned low, giving the jagged smiles of the pumpkins 
an eerie, flickering quality. 

“So,” said Cedric, with a slight smile. “We’re playing 
against each other again!” 

“I s’pose,” said Harry. He really couldn’t think of 
anything to say. The inside of his head seemed to be 
in complete disarray, as though his brain had been 
ransacked. 



Page | 312 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“So ... tell me ...” said Cedric as they reached the 
entrance hall, which was now lit only by torches in 
the absence of the Goblet of Fire. “How did you get 
your name in?” 

“I didn’t,” said Harry, staring up at him. “I didn’t put 
it in. I was telling the truth.” 

“Ah ... okay,” said Cedric. Harry could tell Cedric 
didn’t believe him. “Well ... see you, then.” 

Instead of going up the marble staircase, Cedric 
headed for a door to its right. Harry stood listening to 
him going down the stone steps beyond it, then, 
slowly, he started to climb the marble ones. 

Was anyone except Ron and Hermione going to 
believe him, or would they all think he’d put himself 
in for the tournament? Yet how could anyone think 
that, when he was facing competitors who’d had three 
years’ more magical education than he had — when 
he was now facing tasks that not only sounded very 
dangerous, but which were to be performed in front of 
hundreds of people? Yes, he’d thought about it ... he’d 
fantasized about it ... but it had been a joke, really, 
an idle sort of dream ... he’d never really, seriously 
considered entering. ... 

But someone else had considered it ... someone else 
had wanted him in the tournament, and had made 
sure he was entered. Why? To give him a treat? He 
didn’t think so, somehow. ... 

To see him make a fool of himself? Well, they were 
likely to get their wish. ... 

But to get him killed? 



Page | 313 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Was Moody just being his usual paranoid self? 
Couldn’t someone have put Harry’s name in the 
goblet as a trick, a practical joke? Did anyone really 
want him dead? 

Harry was able to answer that at once. Yes, someone 
wanted him dead, someone had wanted him dead 
ever since he had been a year old ... Lord Voldemort. 
But how could Voldemort have ensured that Harry’s 
name got into the Goblet of Fire? Voldemort was 
supposed to be far away, in some distant country, in 
hiding, alone ... feeble and powerless. ... 

Yet in that dream he had had, just before he had 
awoken with his scar hurting, Voldemort had not 
been alone ... he had been talking to Wormtail ... 
plotting Harry’s murder. . . . 

Harry got a shock to find himself facing the Fat Lady 
already. He had barely noticed where his feet were 
carrying him. It was also a surprise to see that she 
was not alone in her frame. The wizened witch who 
had flitted into her neighbor’s painting when he had 
joined the champions downstairs was now sitting 
smugly beside the Fat Lady. She must have dashed 
through every picture lining seven staircases to reach 
here before him. Both she and the Fat Lady were 
looking down at him with the keenest interest. 

“Well, well, well,” said the Fat Lady, “Violet’s just told 
me everything. Who’s just been chosen as school 
champion, then?” 

“Balderdash,” said Harry dully. 

“It most certainly isn’t!” said the pale witch 
indignantly. 



Page | 314 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“No, no, Vi, it’s the password,” said the Fat Lady 
soothingly, and she swung forward on her hinges to 
let Harry into the common room. 

The blast of noise that met Harry’s ears when the 
portrait opened almost knocked him backward. Next 
thing he knew, he was being wrenched inside the 
common room by about a dozen pairs of hands, and 
was facing the whole of Gryffindor House, all of whom 
were screaming, applauding, and whistling. 

“You should’ve told us you’d entered!” bellowed Fred; 
he looked half annoyed, half deeply impressed. 

“How did you do it without getting a beard? Brilliant!” 
roared George. 

“I didn’t,” Harry said. “I don’t know how — ” 

But Angelina had now swooped down upon him; “Oh 
if it couldn’t be me, at least it’s a Gryffindor — ” 

“You’ll be able to pay back Diggory for that last 
Quidditch match, Harry!” shrieked Katie Bell, another 
of the Gryffindor Chasers. 

“We’ve got food, Harry, come and have some — ” 

“I’m not hungry, I had enough at the feast — ” 

But nobody wanted to hear that he wasn’t hungry; 
nobody wanted to hear that he hadn’t put his name in 
the goblet; not one single person seemed to have 
noticed that he wasn’t at all in the mood to celebrate. 
... Lee Jordan had unearthed a Gryffindor banner 
from somewhere, and he insisted on draping it 
around Harry like a cloak. Harry couldn’t get away; 
whenever he tried to sidle over to the staircase up to 
the dormitories, the crowd around him closed ranks, 
Page | 315 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




forcing another butterbeer on him, stuffing crisps and 
peanuts into his hands. ... Everyone wanted to know 
how he had done it, how he had tricked Dumbledore’s 
Age Line and managed to get his name into the 
goblet. ... 

“I didn’t,” he said, over and over again, “I don’t know 
how it happened.” 

But for all the notice anyone took, he might just as 
well not have answered at all. 

“I’m tired!” he bellowed finally, after nearly half an 
hour. “No, seriously, George — I’m going to bed — ” 

He wanted more than anything to find Ron and 
Hermione, to find a bit of sanity, but neither of them 
seemed to be in the common room. Insisting that he 
needed to sleep, and almost flattening the little 
Creevey brothers as they attempted to waylay him at 
the foot of the stairs, Harry managed to shake 
everyone off and climb up to the dormitory as fast as 
he could. 

To his great relief, he found Ron was lying on his bed 
in the otherwise empty dormitory, still fully dressed. 
He looked up when Harry slammed the door behind 
him. 

“Where ’ve you been?” Harry said. 

“Oh hello,” said Ron. 

He was grinning, but it was a very odd, strained sort 
of grin. Harry suddenly became aware that he was 
still wearing the scarlet Gryffindor banner that Lee 
had tied around him. He hastened to take it off, but it 
was knotted very tightly. Ron lay on the bed without 
moving, watching Harry struggle to remove it. 

Page | 316 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




“So,” he said, when Harry had finally removed the 
banner and thrown it into a corner. 

“Congratulations . ” 

“What d’you mean, congratulations?” said Harry, 
staring at Ron. There was definitely something wrong 
with the way Ron was smiling: It was more like a 
grimace. 

“Well ... no one else got across the Age Line,” said 
Ron. “Not even Fred and George. What did you use — 
the Invisibility Cloak?” 

“The Invisibility Cloak wouldn’t have got me over that 
line,” said Harry slowly. 

“Oh right,” said Ron. “I thought you might’ve told me 
if it was the cloak ... because it would’ve covered both 
of us, wouldn’t it? But you found another way, did 
you?” 

“Listen,” said Harry, “I didn’t put my name in that 
goblet. Someone else must’ve done it.” 

Ron raised his eyebrows. 

“What would they do that for?” 

“I dunno,” said Harry. He felt it would sound very 
melodramatic to say, “To kill me.” 

Ron’s eyebrows rose so high that they were in danger 
of disappearing into his hair. 

“It’s okay, you know, you can tell me the truth,” he 
said. “If you don’t want everyone else to know, fine, 
but I don’t know why you’re bothering to lie, you 
didn’t get into trouble for it, did you? That friend of 
the Fat Lady’s, that Violet, she’s already told us all 
Page | 317 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore’s letting you enter. A thousand Galleons 
prize money, eh? And you don’t have to do end-of- 
year tests either. ...” 

“I didn’t put my name in that goblet!” said Harry, 
starting to feel angry. 

“Yeah, okay,” said Ron, in exactly the same sceptical 
tone as Cedric. “Only you said this morning you’d 
have done it last night, and no one would’ve seen you. 
... I’m not stupid, you know.” 

“You’re doing a really good impression of it,” Harry 
snapped. 

“Yeah?” said Ron, and there was no trace of a grin, 
forced or otherwise, on his face now. “You want to get 
to bed, Harry. I expect you’ll need to be up early 
tomorrow for a photo-call or something.” 

He wrenched the hangings shut around his four- 
poster, leaving Harry standing there by the door, 
staring at the dark red velvet curtains, now hiding 
one of the few people he had been sure would believe 
him. 



Page | 318 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE WEIGHING OF THE WANDS 

When Harry woke up on Sunday morning, it took him 
a moment to remember why he felt so miserable and 
worried. Then the memory of the previous night rolled 
over him. He sat up and ripped back the curtains of 
his own four-poster, intending to talk to Ron, to force 
Ron to believe him — only to find that Ron’s bed was 
empty; he had obviously gone down to breakfast. 

Harry dressed and went down the spiral staircase into 
the common room. The moment he appeared, the 
people who had already finished breakfast broke into 
applause again. The prospect of going down into the 
Great Hall and facing the rest of the Gryffindors, all 
treating him like some sort of hero, was not inviting; 
it was that, however, or stay here and allow himself to 
be cornered by the Creevey brothers, who were both 
beckoning frantically to him to join them. He walked 
resolutely over to the portrait hole, pushed it open, 
climbed out of it, and found himself face-to-face with 
Hermione. 



Page | 319 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“Hello,” she said, holding up a stack of toast, which 
she was carrying in a napkin. “I brought you this. ... 
Want to go for a walk?” 

“Good idea,” said Harry gratefully. 

They went downstairs, crossed the entrance hall 
quickly without looking in at the Great Hall, and were 
soon striding across the lawn toward the lake, where 
the Durmstrang ship was moored, reflected blackly in 
the water. It was a chilly morning, and they kept 
moving, munching their toast, as Harry told 
Hermione exactly what had happened after he had left 
the Gryffindor table the night before. To his immense 
relief, Hermione accepted his story without question. 

“Well, of course I knew you hadn’t entered yourself,” 
she said when he’d finished telling her about the 
scene in the chamber off the Hall. “The look on your 
face when Dumbledore read out your name! But the 
question is, who did put it in? Because Moody’s right, 
Harry ... I don’t think any student could have done it 
... they’d never be able to fool the Goblet, or get over 
Dumbledore ’s — ” 

“Have you seen Ron?” Harry interrupted. 

Hermione hesitated. 

“Erm ... yes ... he was at breakfast,” she said. 

“Does he still think I entered myself?” 

“Well ... no, I don’t think so ... not really,” said 
Hermione awkwardly. 

“What’s that supposed to mean, ‘not really’?” 



Page | 320 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh Harry, isn’t it obvious?” Hermione said 
despairingly. “He’s jealous!” 



“Jealous?” Harry said incredulously. “Jealous of 
what? He wants to make a prat of himself in front of 
the whole school, does he?” 

“Look,” said Hermione patiently, “it’s always you who 
gets all the attention, you know it is. I know it’s not 
your fault,” she added quickly, seeing Harry open his 
mouth furiously. “I know you don’t ask for it ... but — 
well — you know, Ron’s got all those brothers to 
compete against at home, and you’re his best friend, 
and you’re really famous — he’s always shunted to 
one side whenever people see you, and he puts up 
with it, and he never mentions it, but I suppose this 
is just one time too many. ...” 

“Great,” said Harry bitterly. “Really great. Tell him 
from me I’ll swap any time he wants. Tell him from 
me he’s welcome to it. ... People gawping at my 
forehead everywhere I go. ...” 

“I’m not telling him anything,” Hermione said shortly. 
“Tell him yourself. It’s the only way to sort this out.” 

“I’m not running around after him trying to make him 
grow up!” Harry said, so loudly that several owls in a 
nearby tree took flight in alarm. “Maybe he’ll believe 
I’m not enjoying myself once I’ve got my neck broken 
or — ” 



“That’s not funny,” said Hermione quietly. “That’s not 
funny at all.” She looked extremely anxious. “Harry, 
I’ve been thinking — you know what we’ve got to do, 
don’t you? Straight away, the moment we get back to 
the castle?” 

“Yeah, give Ron a good kick up the — ” 

Page | 321 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Write to Sirius. You’ve got to tell him what’s 
happened. He asked you to keep him posted on 
everything that’s going on at Hogwarts. ... It’s almost 
as if he expected something like this to happen. I 
brought some parchment and a quill out with me — ” 

“Come off it,” said Harry, looking around to check 
that they couldn’t be overheard, but the grounds were 
quite deserted. “He came back to the country just 
because my scar twinged. He’ll probably come 
bursting right into the castle if I tell him someone’s 
entered me in the Triwizard Tournament — ” 

“He’d want you to tell him,” said Hermione sternly. 
“He’s going to find out anyway — ” 

“How?” 

“Harry, this isn’t going to be kept quiet,” said 
Hermione, very seriously. “This tournament’s famous, 
and you’re famous. Ill be really surprised if there isn’t 
anything in the Daily Prophet about you competing. . . . 
You’re already in half the books about You-Know- 
Who, you know ... and Sirius would rather hear it 
from you, I know he would.” 

“Okay, okay, I’ll write to him,” said Harry, throwing 
his last piece of toast into the lake. They both stood 
and watched it floating there for a moment, before a 
large tentacle rose out of the water and scooped it 
beneath the surface. Then they returned to the castle. 

“Whose owl am I going to use?” Harry said as they 
climbed the stairs. “He told me not to use Hedwig 
again.” 

“Ask Ron if you can borrow — ” 

“I’m not asking Ron for anything,” Harry said flatly. 

Page | 322 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, borrow one of the school owls, then, anyone 
can use them,” said Hermione. 

They went up to the Owlery Hermione gave Harry a 
piece of parchment, a quill, and a bottle of ink, then 
strolled around the long lines of perches, looking at 
all the different owls, while Harry sat down against a 
wall and wrote his letter. 

Dear Sirius, 

You told me to keep you posted on what’s happening 
at Hogwarts, so here goes — I don’t know if you’ve 
heard, but the Tri-wizard Tournament’s happening this 
year and on Saturday night I got picked as a fourth 
champion. I don’t know who put my name in the Goblet 
of Fire, because I didn’t The other Hogwarts champion 
is Cedric Diggory, from Hufflepuff 

He paused at this point, thinking. He had an urge to 
say something about the large weight of anxiety that 
seemed to have settled inside his chest since last 
night, but he couldn’t think how to translate this into 
words, so he simply dipped his quill back into the ink 
bottle and wrote, 

Hope you’re okay, and Buckbeak — Harry 



“Finished,” he told Hermione, getting to his feet and 
brushing straw off his robes. At this, Hedwig came 
fluttering down onto his shoulder and held out her 
leg. 

“I can’t use you,” Harry told her, looking around for 
the school owls. “I’ve got to use one of these. ...” 



Page | 323 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hedwig gave a very loud hoot and took off so suddenly 
that her talons cut into his shoulder. She kept her 
back to Harry all the time he was tying his letter to 
the leg of a large barn owl. When the barn owl had 
flown off, Harry reached out to stroke Hedwig, but she 
clicked her beak furiously and soared up into the 
rafters out of reach. 

“First Ron, then you,” said Harry angrily. “ This isn’t 
my fault.” 

If Harry had thought that matters would improve 
once everyone got used to the idea of him being 
champion, the following day showed him how 
mistaken he was. He could no longer avoid the rest of 
the school once he was back at lessons — and it was 
clear that the rest of the school, just like the 
Gryffindors, thought Harry had entered himself for 
the tournament. Unlike the Gryffindors, however, 
they did not seem impressed. 

The Hufflepuffs, who were usually on excellent terms 
with the Gryffindors, had turned remarkably cold 
toward the whole lot of them. One Herbology lesson 
was enough to demonstrate this. It was plain that the 
Hufflepuffs felt that Harry had stolen their 
champion’s glory; a feeling exacerbated, perhaps, by 
the fact that Hufflepuff House very rarely got any 
glory, and that Cedric was one of the few who had 
ever given them any, having beaten Gryffindor once at 
Quidditch. Ernie Macmillan and Justin Finch- 
Fletchley, with whom Harry normally got on very well, 
did not talk to him even though they were repotting 
Bouncing Bulbs at the same tray — though they did 
laugh rather unpleasantly when one of the Bouncing 
Bulbs wriggled free from Harry’s grip and smacked 
him hard in the face. Ron wasn’t talking to Harry 
either. Hermione sat between them, making very 
forced conversation, but though both answered her 
Page | 324 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




normally, they avoided making eye contact with each 
other. Harry thought even Professor Sprout seemed 
distant with him — but then, she was Head of 
Hufflepuff House. 

He would have been looking forward to seeing Hagrid 
under normal circumstances, but Care of Magical 
Creatures meant seeing the Slytherins too — the first 
time he would come face-to-face with them since 
becoming champion. 

Predictably, Malfoy arrived at Hagrid ’s cabin with his 
familiar sneer firmly in place. 

“Ah, look, boys, it’s the champion,” he said to Crabbe 
and Goyle the moment he got within earshot of Harry. 
“Got your autograph books? Better get a signature 
now, because I doubt he’s going to be around much 
longer. ... Half the Triwizard champions have died ... 
how long d’you reckon you’re going to last, Potter? 

Ten minutes into the first task’s my bet.” 

Crabbe and Goyle guffawed sycophantically, but 
Malfoy had to stop there, because Hagrid emerged 
from the back of his cabin balancing a teetering tower 
of crates, each containing a very large Blast-Ended 
Skrewt. To the class’s horror, Hagrid proceeded to 
explain that the reason the skrewts had been killing 
one another was an excess of pent-up energy, and 
that the solution would be for each student to fix a 
leash on a skrewt and take it for a short walk. The 
only good thing about this plan was that it distracted 
Malfoy completely. 

“Take this thing for a walk?” he repeated in disgust, 
staring into one of the boxes. “And where exactly are 
we supposed to fix the leash? Around the sting, the 
blasting end, or the sucker?” 



Page | 325 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Roun’ the middle,” said Hagrid, demonstrating. “Er 
— yeh might want ter put on yer dragon-hide gloves, 
jus’ as an extra precaution, like. Harry — you come 
here an’ help me with this big one. ...” 

Hagrid’s real intention, however, was to talk to Harry 
away from the rest of the class. He waited until 
everyone else had set off with their skrewts, then 
turned to Harry and said, very seriously, “So — yer 
competin’, Harry. In the tournament. School 
champion.” 

“One of the champions,” Harry corrected him. 

Hagrid’s beetle-black eyes looked very anxious under 
his wild eyebrows. 

“No idea who put yeh in fer it, Harry?” 

“You believe I didn’t do it, then?” said Harry, 
concealing with difficulty the rush of gratitude he felt 
at Hagrid’s words. 

“ ’Course I do,” Hagrid grunted. “Yeh say it wasn’ you, 
an’ I believe yeh — an’ Dumbledore believes yer, an’ 
all.” 

“Wish I knew who did do it,” said Harry bitterly. 

The pair of them looked out over the lawn; the class 
was widely scattered now, and all in great difficulty. 
The skrewts were now over three feet long, and 
extremely powerful. No longer shell-less and colorless, 
they had developed a kind of thick, grayish, shiny 
armor. They looked like a cross between giant 
scorpions and elongated crabs — but still without 
recognizable heads or eyes. They had become 
immensely strong and very hard to control. 



Page | 326 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Look like they’re havin’ fun, don’ they?” Hagrid said 
happily. Harry assumed he was talking about the 
skrewts, because his classmates certainly weren’t; 
every now and then, with an alarming bang, one of 
the skrewts’ ends would explode, causing it to shoot 
forward several yards, and more than one person was 
being dragged along on their stomach, trying 
desperately to get back on their feet. 

“Ah, I don’ know, Harry,” Hagrid sighed suddenly, 
looking back down at him with a worried expression 
on his face. “School champion ... everythin’ seems ter 
happen ter you, doesn’ it?” 

Harry didn’t answer. Yes, everything did seem to 
happen to him ... that was more or less what 
Hermione had said as they had walked around the 
lake, and that was the reason, according to her, that 
Ron was no longer talking to him. 

The next few days were some of Harry’s worst at 
Hogwarts. The closest he had ever come to feeling like 
this had been during those months, in his second 
year, when a large part of the school had suspected 
him of attacking his fellow students. But Ron had 
been on his side then. He thought he could have 
coped with the rest of the school’s behavior if he could 
just have had Ron back as a friend, but he wasn’t 
going to try and persuade Ron to talk to him if Ron 
didn’t want to. Nevertheless, it was lonely with dislike 
pouring in on him from all sides. 

He could understand the Hufflepuffs’ attitude, even if 
he didn’t like it; they had their own champion to 
support. He expected nothing less than vicious 
insults from the Slytherins — he was highly 
unpopular there and always had been, because he 
had helped Gryffindor beat them so often, both at 
Quidditch and in the Inter-House Championship. But 
Page | 327 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




he had hoped the Ravenclaws might have found it in 
their hearts to support him as much as Cedric. He 
was wrong, however. Most Ravenclaws seemed to 
think that he had been desperate to earn himself a bit 
more fame by tricking the goblet into accepting his 
name. 

Then there was the fact that Cedric looked the part of 
a champion so much more than he did. Exceptionally 
handsome, with his straight nose, dark hair, and gray 
eyes, it was hard to say who was receiving more 
admiration these days, Cedric or Viktor Krum. Harry 
actually saw the same sixth-year girls who had been 
so keen to get Krum’s autograph begging Cedric to 
sign their school bags one lunchtime. 

Meanwhile there was no reply from Sirius, Hedwig 
was refusing to come anywhere near him, Professor 
Trelawney was predicting his death with even more 
certainty than usual, and he did so badly at 
Summoning Charms in Professor Flitwick’s class that 
he was given extra homework — the only person to 
get any, apart from Neville. 

“It’s really not that difficult, Harry,” Hermione tried to 
reassure him as they left Flitwick’s class — she had 
been making objects zoom across the room to her all 
lesson, as though she were some sort of weird magnet 
for board dusters, wastepaper baskets, and 
lunascopes. “You just weren’t concentrating properly 



“Wonder why that was,” said Harry darkly as Cedric 
Diggory walked past, surrounded by a large group of 
simpering girls, all of whom looked at Harry as 
though he were a particularly large Blast-Ended 
Skrewt. “Still — never mind, eh? Double Potions to 
look forward to this afternoon. ...” 



Page | 328 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Double Potions was always a horrible experience, but 
these days it was nothing short of torture. Being shut 
in a dungeon for an hour and a half with Snape and 
the Slytherins, all of whom seemed determined to 
punish Harry as much as possible for daring to 
become school champion, was about the most 
unpleasant thing Harry could imagine. He had 
already struggled through one Friday’s worth, with 
Hermione sitting next to him intoning “ignore them, 
ignore them, ignore them” under her breath, and he 
couldn’t see why today should be any better. 

When he and Hermione arrived at Snape ’s dungeon 
after lunch, they found the Slytherins waiting outside, 
each and every one of them wearing a large badge on 
the front of his or her robes. For one wild moment 
Harry thought they were S.P.E.W. badges — then he 
saw that they all bore the same message, in luminous 
red letters that burnt brightly in the dimly lit 
underground passage: 

Support CEDRIC DIGGORY — 

The REAL Hogwarts Champion 

“Like them, Potter?” said Malfoy loudly as Harry 
approached. “And this isn’t all they do — look!” 

He pressed his badge into his chest, and the message 
upon it vanished, to be replaced by another one, 
which glowed green: 

POTTER STINKS 

The Slytherins howled with laughter. Each of them 
pressed their badges too, until the message POTTER 
STINKS was shining brightly all around Harry. He felt 
the heat rise in his face and neck. 



Page | 329 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh very funny,” Hermione said sarcastically to Pansy 
Parkinson and her gang of Slytherin girls, who were 
laughing harder than anyone, “really witty.” 

Ron was standing against the wall with Dean and 
Seamus. He wasn’t laughing, but he wasn’t sticking 
up for Harry either. 

“Want one, Granger?” said Malfoy, holding out a 
badge to Hermione. “I’ve got loads. But don’t touch 
my hand, now. I’ve just washed it, you see; don’t want 
a Mudblood sliming it up.” 

Some of the anger Harry had been feeling for days 
and days seemed to burst through a dam in his chest. 
He had reached for his wand before he’d thought 
what he was doing. People all around them scrambled 
out of the way, backing down the corridor. 

“Harry!” Hermione said warningly. 

“Go on, then, Potter,” Malfoy said quietly, drawing out 
his own wand. “Moody’s not here to look after you 
now — do it, if you’ve got the guts — ” 

For a split second, they looked into each other’s eyes, 
then, at exactly the same time, both acted. 

“ FurnunculusV’ Harry yelled. 

“ DensaugeoV’ screamed Malfoy. 

Jets of light shot from both wands, hit each other in 
midair, and ricocheted off at angles — Harry’s hit 
Goyle in the face, and Malfoy’s hit Hermione. Goyle 
bellowed and put his hands to his nose, where great 
ugly boils were springing up — Hermione, whimpering 
in panic, was clutching her mouth. 



Page | 330 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Hermione!” 



Ron had hurried forward to see what was wrong with 
her; Harry turned and saw Ron dragging Hermione ’s 
hand away from her face. It wasn’t a pretty sight. 
Hermione ’s front teeth — already larger than average 
— were now growing at an alarming rate; she was 
looking more and more like a beaver as her teeth 
elongated, past her bottom lip, toward her chin — 
panic-stricken, she felt them and let out a terrified 
cry. 

“And what is all this noise about?” said a soft, deadly 
voice. 

Snape had arrived. The Slytherins clamored to give 
their explanations; Snape pointed a long yellow finger 
at Malfoy and said, “Explain.” 

“Potter attacked me, sir — ” 

“We attacked each other at the same time!” Harry 
shouted. 

“ — and he hit Goyle — look — ” 

Snape examined Goyle, whose face now resembled 
something that would have been at home in a book 
on poisonous fungi. 

“Hospital wing, Goyle,” Snape said calmly. 

“Malfoy got Hermione!” Ron said. “Loo/d” 

He forced Hermione to show Snape her teeth — she 
was doing her best to hide them with her hands, 
though this was difficult as they had now grown down 
past her collar. Pansy Parkinson and the other 



Page | 331 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Slytherin girls were doubled up with silent giggles, 
pointing at Hermione from behind Snape ’s back. 

Snape looked coldly at Hermione, then said, “I see no 
difference.” 

Hermione let out a whimper; her eyes filled with tears, 
she turned on her heel and ran, ran all the way up 
the corridor and out of sight. 

It was lucky, perhaps, that both Harry and Ron 
started shouting at Snape at the same time; lucky 
their voices echoed so much in the stone corridor, for 
in the confused din, it was impossible for him to hear 
exactly what they were calling him. He got the gist, 
however. 

“Let’s see,” he said, in his silkiest voice. “Fifty points 
from Gryffindor and a detention each for Potter and 
Weasley. Now get inside, or it’ll be a week’s worth of 
detentions.” 

Harry’s ears were ringing. The injustice of it made 
him want to curse Snape into a thousand slimy 
pieces. He passed Snape, walked with Ron to the 
back of the dungeon, and slammed his bag down onto 
the table. Ron was shaking with anger too — for a 
moment, it felt as though everything was back to 
normal between them, but then Ron turned and sat 
down with Dean and Seamus instead, leaving Harry 
alone at his table. On the other side of the dungeon, 
Malfoy turned his back on Snape and pressed his 
badge, smirking. POTTER STINKS flashed once more 
across the room. 

Harry sat there staring at Snape as the lesson began, 
picturing horrific things happening to him. ... If only 
he knew how to do the Cruciatus Curse ... he’d have 



Page | 332 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Snape flat on his back like that spider, jerking and 
twitching. ... 

“Antidotes!” said Snape, looking around at them all, 
his cold black eyes glittering unpleasantly. “You 
should all have prepared your recipes now. I want you 
to brew them carefully, and then, we will be selecting 
someone on whom to test one. ...” 

Snape’s eyes met Harry’s, and Harry knew what was 
coming. Snape was going to poison him. Harry 
imagined picking up his cauldron, and sprinting to 
the front of the class, and bringing it down on Snape’s 
greasy head — 

And then a knock on the dungeon door burst in on 
Harry’s thoughts. 

It was Colin Creevey; he edged into the room, 
beaming at Harry, and walked up to Snape’s desk at 
the front of the room. 

“Yes?” said Snape curtly. 

“Please, sir, I’m supposed to take Harry Potter 
upstairs.” 

Snape stared down his hooked nose at Colin, whose 
smile faded from his eager face. 

“Potter has another hour of Potions to complete,” said 
Snape coldly. “He will come upstairs when this class 
is finished.” 

Colin went pink. 

“Sir — sir, Mr. Bagman wants him,” he said 
nervously. “All the champions have got to go, I think 
they want to take photographs. ...” 

Page | 333 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry would have given anything he owned to have 
stopped Colin saying those last few words. He 
chanced half a glance at Ron, but Ron was staring 
determinedly at the ceiling. 

“Very well, very well,” Snape snapped. “Potter, leave 
your things here, I want you back down here later to 
test your antidote.” 

“Please, sir — he’s got to take his things with him,” 
squeaked Colin. “All the champions — ” 

“Very well\” said Snape. “Potter — take your bag and 
get out of my sight!” 

Harry swung his bag over his shoulder, got up, and 
headed for the door. As he walked through the 
Slytherin desks, POTTER STINKS flashed at him from 
every direction. 

“It’s amazing, isn’t it, Harry?” said Colin, starting to 
speak the moment Harry had closed the dungeon 
door behind him. “Isn’t it, though? You being 
champion?” 

“Yeah, really amazing,” said Harry heavily as they set 
off toward the steps into the entrance hall. “What do 
they want photos for, Colin?” 

“The Daily Prophet, I think!” 

“Great,” said Harry dully. “Exactly what I need. More 
publicity.” 

“Good luck!” said Colin when they had reached the 
right room. Harry knocked on the door and entered. 

He was in a fairly small classroom; most of the desks 
had been pushed away to the back of the room, 

Page | 334 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




leaving a large space in the middle; three of them, 
however, had been placed end-to-end in front of the 
blackboard and covered with a long length of velvet. 
Five chairs had been set behind the velvet-covered 
desks, and Ludo Bagman was sitting in one of them, 
talking to a witch Harry had never seen before, who 
was wearing magenta robes. 

Viktor Krum was standing moodily in a corner as 
usual and not talking to anybody. Cedric and Fleur 
were in conversation. Fleur looked a good deal 
happier than Harry had seen her so far; she kept 
throwing back her head so that her long silvery hair 
caught the light. A paunchy man, holding a large 
black camera that was smoking slightly, was 
watching Fleur out of the corner of his eye. 

Bagman suddenly spotted Harry, got up quickly, and 
bounded forward. 

“Ah, here he is! Champion number four! In you come, 
Harry, in you come ... nothing to worry about, it’s just 
the wand weighing ceremony, the rest of the judges 
will be here in a moment — ” 

“Wand weighing?” Harry repeated nervously. 

“We have to check that your wands are fully 
functional, no problems, you know, as they’re your 
most important tools in the tasks ahead,” said 
Bagman. “The expert’s upstairs now with 
Dumbledore. And then there’s going to be a little 
photo shoot. This is Rita Skeeter,” he added, 
gesturing toward the witch in magenta robes. “She’s 
doing a small piece on the tournament for the Daily 
Prophet ...” 

“Maybe not that small, Ludo,” said Rita Skeeter, her 
eyes on Harry. 

Page | 335 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Her hair was set in elaborate and curiously rigid curls 
that contrasted oddly with her heavy-jawed face. She 
wore jeweled spectacles. The thick fingers clutching 
her crocodile-skin handbag ended in two-inch nails, 
painted crimson. 

“I wonder if I could have a little word with Harry 
before we start?” she said to Bagman, but still gazing 
fixedly at Harry. “The youngest champion, you know 
... to add a bit of color?” 

“Certainly!” cried Bagman. “That is — if Harry has no 
objection?” 

“Er — ” said Harry. 

“Lovely,” said Rita Skeeter, and in a second, her 
scarlet-taloned fingers had Harry’s upper arm in a 
surprisingly strong grip, and she was steering him 
out of the room again and opening a nearby door. 

“We don’t want to be in there with all that noise,” she 
said. “Let’s see ... ah, yes, this is nice and cozy.” 

It was a broom cupboard. Harry stared at her. 

“Come along, dear — that’s right — lovely,” said Rita 
Skeeter again, perching herself precariously upon an 
upturned bucket, pushing Harry down onto a 
cardboard box, and closing the door, throwing them 
into darkness. “Let’s see now ...” 

She unsnapped her crocodile-skin handbag and 
pulled out a handful of candles, which she lit with a 
wave of her wand and magicked into midair, so that 
they could see what they were doing. 

“You won’t mind, Harry, if I use a Quick-Quotes 
Quill? It leaves me free to talk to you normally. ...” 

Page | 336 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“A what?” said Harry. 



Rita Skeeter’s smile widened. Harry counted three 
gold teeth. She reached again into her crocodile bag 
and drew out a long acid-green quill and a roll of 
parchment, which she stretched out between them on 
a crate of Mrs. Skower’s All-Purpose Magical Mess 
Remover. She put the tip of the green quill into her 
mouth, sucked it for a moment with apparent relish, 
then placed it upright on the parchment, where it 
stood balanced on its point, quivering slightly. 

“Testing ... my name is Rita Skeeter, Daily Prophet 
reporter.” 

Harry looked down quickly at the quill. The moment 
Rita Skeeter had spoken, the green quill had started 
to scribble, skidding across the parchment: 

Attractive blonde Rita Skeeter, forty-three, whose 
savage quill has punctured many inflated reputations 



“Lovely,” said Rita Skeeter, yet again, and she ripped 
the top piece of parchment off, crumpled it up, and 
stuffed it into her handbag. Now she leaned toward 
Harry and said, “So, Harry ... what made you decide 
to enter the Triwizard Tournament?” 

“Er — ” said Harry again, but he was distracted by the 
quill. Even though he wasn’t speaking, it was dashing 
across the parchment, and in its wake he could make 
out a fresh sentence: 

An ugly scar, souvenir of a tragic past, disfigures the 
otherwise charming face of Harry Potter, whose eyes 



Page | 337 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Ignore the quill, Harry,” said Rita Skeeter firmly. 
Reluctantly, Harry looked up at her instead. “Now — 
why did you decide to enter the tournament, Harry?” 

“I didn’t,” said Harry. “I don’t know how my name got 
into the Goblet of Fire. I didn’t put it in there.” 

Rita Skeeter raised one heavily penciled eyebrow. 

“Come now, Harry, there’s no need to be scared of 
getting into trouble. We all know you shouldn’t really 
have entered at all. But don’t worry about that. Our 
readers love a rebel.” 

“But I didn’t enter,” Harry repeated. “I don’t know 
who — ” 

“How do you feel about the tasks ahead?” said Rita 
Skeeter. “Excited? Nervous?” 

“I haven’t really thought ... yeah, nervous, I suppose,” 
said Harry. His insides squirmed uncomfortably as he 
spoke. 

“Champions have died in the past, haven’t they?” said 
Rita Skeeter briskly. “Have you thought about that at 
all?” 

“Well ... they say it’s going to be a lot safer this year,” 
said Harry. 

The quill whizzed across the parchment between 
them, back and forward as though it were skating. 

“Of course, you’ve looked death in the face before, 
haven’t you?” said Rita Skeeter, watching him closely. 
“How would you say that’s affected you?” 

“Er,” said Harry, yet again. 

Page | 338 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Do you think that the trauma in your past might 
have made you keen to prove yourself? To live up to 
your name? Do you think that perhaps you were 
tempted to enter the Triwizard Tournament because 



“I didn’t enter,” said Harry, starting to feel irritated. 

“Can you remember your parents at all?” said Rita 
Skeeter, talking over him. 

“No,” said Harry. 

“How do you think they’d feel if they knew you were 
competing in the Triwizard Tournament? Proud? 
Worried? Angry?” 

Harry was feeling really annoyed now. How on earth 
was he to know how his parents would feel if they 
were alive? He could feel Rita Skeeter watching him 
very intently. Frowning, he avoided her gaze and 
looked down at words the quill had just written: 

Tears fill those startling green eyes as our 
conversation turns to the parents he can barely 
remember. 

“I have NOT got tears in my eyes!” said Harry loudly. 

Before Rita Skeeter could say a word, the door of the 
broom cupboard was pulled open. Harry looked 
around, blinking in the bright light. Albus 
Dumbledore stood there, looking down at both of 
them, squashed into the cupboard. 

“ Dumbledorel” cried Rita Skeeter, with every 
appearance of delight — but Harry noticed that her 
quill and the parchment had suddenly vanished from 
the box of Magical Mess Remover, and Rita’s clawed 

Page | 339 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




fingers were hastily snapping shut the clasp of her 
crocodile-skin bag. “How are you?” she said, standing 
up and holding out one of her large, mannish hands 
to Dumbledore. “I hope you saw my piece over the 
summer about the International Confederation of 
Wizards’ Conference?” 

“Enchantingly nasty,” said Dumbledore, his eyes 
twinkling. “I particularly enjoyed your description of 
me as an obsolete dingbat.” 

Rita Skeeter didn’t look remotely abashed. 

“I was just making the point that some of your ideas 
are a little old-fashioned, Dumbledore, and that many 
wizards in the street — ” 

“I will be delighted to hear the reasoning behind the 
rudeness, Rita,” said Dumbledore, with a courteous 
bow and a smile, “but I’m afraid we will have to 
discuss the matter later. The Weighing of the Wands 
is about to start, and it cannot take place if one of our 
champions is hidden in a broom cupboard.” 

Very glad to get away from Rita Skeeter, Harry 
hurried back into the room. The other champions 
were now sitting in chairs near the door, and he sat 
down quickly next to Cedric, looking up at the velvet- 
covered table, where four of the five judges were now 
sitting — Professor Karkaroff, Madame Maxime, Mr. 
Crouch, and Ludo Bagman. Rita Skeeter settled 
herself down in a corner; Harry saw her slip the 
parchment out of her bag again, spread it on her 
knee, suck the end of the Quick-Quotes Quill, and 
place it once more on the parchment. 

“May I introduce Mr. Ollivander?” said Dumbledore, 
taking his place at the judges’ table and talking to the 
champions. “He will be checking your wands to 

Page | 340 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




ensure that they are in good condition before the 
tournament.” 

Harry looked around, and with a jolt of surprise saw 
an old wizard with large, pale eyes standing quietly by 
the window. Harry had met Mr. Ollivander before — 
he was the wand-maker from whom Harry had 
bought his own wand over three years ago in Diagon 
Alley. 

“Mademoiselle Delacour, could we have you first, 
please?” said Mr. Ollivander, stepping into the empty 
space in the middle of the room. 

Fleur Delacour swept over to Mr. Ollivander and 
handed him her wand. 

“Hmmm ...” he said. 

He twirled the wand between his long fingers like a 
baton and it emitted a number of pink and gold 
sparks. Then he held it close to his eyes and 
examined it carefully. 

“Yes,” he said quietly, “nine and a half inches ... 
inflexible . . . rosewood . . . and containing . . . dear me 



“An ’air from ze ’ead of a veela,” said Fleur. “One of 
my grandmuzzer’s.” 

So Fleur was part veela, thought Harry, making a 
mental note to tell Ron . . . then he remembered that 
Ron wasn’t speaking to him. 

“Yes,” said Mr. Ollivander, “yes, I’ve never used veela 
hair myself, of course. I find it makes for rather 
temperamental wands . . . however, to each his own, 
and if this suits you ...” 

Page | 341 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mr. Ollivander ran his fingers along the wand, 
apparently checking for scratches or bumps; then he 
muttered, “ OrchideousV’ and a bunch of flowers burst 
from the wand tip. 

“Very well, very well, it’s in fine working order,” said 
Mr. Ollivander, scooping up the flowers and handing 
them to Fleur with her wand. “Mr. Diggory, you next.” 

Fleur glided back to her seat, smiling at Cedric as he 
passed her. 

“Ah, now, this is one of mine, isn’t it?” said Mr. 
Ollivander, with much more enthusiasm, as Cedric 
handed over his wand. “Yes, I remember it well. 
Containing a single hair from the tail of a particularly 
fine male unicorn . . . must have been seventeen 
hands; nearly gored me with his horn after I plucked 
his tail. Twelve and a quarter inches ... ash ... 
pleasantly springy. It’s in fine condition. ... You treat 
it regularly?” 

“Polished it last night,” said Cedric, grinning. 

Harry looked down at his own wand. He could see 
finger marks all over it. He gathered a fistful of robe 
from his knee and tried to rub it clean surreptitiously. 
Several gold sparks shot out of the end of it. Fleur 
Delacour gave him a very patronizing look, and he 
desisted. 

Mr. Ollivander sent a stream of silver smoke rings 
across the room from the tip of Cedric’s wand, 
pronounced himself satisfied, and then said, “Mr. 
Krum, if you please.” 

Viktor Krum got up and slouched, round-shouldered 
and duck-footed, toward Mr. Ollivander. He thrust 



Page | 342 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




out his wand and stood scowling, with his hands in 
the pockets of his robes. 



“Hmm,” said Mr. Ollivander, “this is a Gregorovitch 
creation, unless I’m much mistaken? A fine wand- 
maker, though the styling is never quite what I . . . 
however ...” 

He lifted the wand and examined it minutely, turning 
it over and over before his eyes. 

“Yes . . . hornbeam and dragon heartstring?” he shot at 
Krum, who nodded. “Rather thicker than one usually 
sees . . . quite rigid . . . ten and a quarter inches . . . 

Avis'.” 

The hornbeam wand let off a blast like a gun, and a 
number of small, twittering birds flew out of the end 
and through the open window into the watery 
sunlight. 

“Good,” said Mr. Ollivander, handing Krum back his 
wand. “Which leaves ... Mr. Potter.” 

Harry got to his feet and walked past Krum to Mr. 
Ollivander. He handed over his wand. 

“Aaaah, yes,” said Mr. Ollivander, his pale eyes 
suddenly gleaming. “Yes, yes, yes. How well I 
remember.” 

Harry could remember too. He could remember it as 
though it had happened yesterday. . . 

Four summers ago, on his eleventh birthday, he had 
entered Mr. Ollivander’s shop with Hagrid to buy a 
wand. Mr. Ollivander had taken his measurements 
and then started handing him wands to try. Harry 
had waved what felt like every wand in the shop, until 
Page | 343 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




at last he had found the one that suited him — this 
one, which was made of holly, eleven inches long, and 
contained a single feather from the tail of a phoenix. 
Mr. Ollivander had been very surprised that Harry 
had been so compatible with this wand. “Curious,” he 
had said, “curious,” and not until Harry asked what 
was curious had Mr. Ollivander explained that the 
phoenix feather in Harry’s wand had come from the 
same bird that had supplied the core of Lord 
Voldemort’s. 

Harry had never shared this piece of information with 
anybody. He was very fond of his wand, and as far as 
he was concerned its relation to Voldemort’s wand 
was something it couldn’t help — rather as he 
couldn’t help being related to Aunt Petunia. However, 
he really hoped that Mr. Ollivander wasn’t about to 
tell the room about it. He had a funny feeling Rita 
Skeeter’s Quick-Quotes Quill might just explode with 
excitement if he did. 

Mr. Ollivander spent much longer examining Harry’s 
wand than anyone else’s. Eventually, however, he 
made a fountain of wine shoot out of it, and handed it 
back to Harry, announcing that it was still in perfect 
condition. 

“Thank you all,” said Dumbledore, standing up at the 
judges’ table. “You may go back to your lessons now 
— or perhaps it would be quicker just to go down to 
dinner, as they are about to end — ” 

Feeling that at last something had gone right today, 
Harry got up to leave, but the man with the black 
camera jumped up and cleared his throat. 

“Photos, Dumbledore, photos!” cried Bagman 
excitedly. “All the judges and champions, what do you 
think, Rita?” 

Page | 344 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Er — yes, let’s do those first,” said Rita Skeeter, 
whose eyes were upon Harry again. “And then 
perhaps some individual shots.” 

The photographs took a long time. Madame Maxime 
cast everyone else into shadow wherever she stood, 
and the photographer couldn’t stand far enough back 
to get her into the frame; eventually she had to sit 
while everyone else stood around her. Karkaroff kept 
twirling his goatee around his finger to give it an extra 
curl; Krum, whom Harry would have thought would 
have been used to this sort of thing, skulked, half- 
hidden, at the back of the group. The photographer 
seemed keenest to get Fleur at the front, but Rita 
Skeeter kept hurrying forward and dragging Harry 
into greater prominence. Then she insisted on 
separate shots of all the champions. At last, they were 
free to go. 

Harry went down to dinner. Hermione wasn’t there — 
he supposed she was still in the hospital wing having 
her teeth fixed. He ate alone at the end of the table, 
then returned to Gryffindor Tower, thinking of all the 
extra work on Summoning Charms that he had to do. 
Up in the dormitory, he came across Ron. 

“You’ve had an owl,” said Ron brusquely the moment 
he walked in. He was pointing at Harry’s pillow. The 
school barn owl was waiting for him there. 

“Oh — right,” said Harry. 

“And we’ve got to do our detentions tomorrow night, 
Snape’s dungeon,” said Ron. 

He then walked straight out of the room, not looking 
at Harry. For a moment, Harry considered going after 
him — he wasn’t sure whether he wanted to talk to 
him or hit him, both seemed quite appealing — but 

Page | 345 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the lure of Sirius’s answer was too strong. Harry 
strode over to the barn owl, took the letter off its leg, 
and unrolled it. 

Harry — 

I can’t say everything I would like to in a letter, it’s too 
risky in case the owl is intercepted — we need to talk 
face-to-face. Can you ensure that you are alone by the 
fire in Gryffindor Tower at one o’clock in the morning 
on the 22nd of November? 

I know better than anyone that you can look after 
yourself and while you’re around Dumbledore and 
Moody I don’t think anyone will be able to hurt you. 
However, someone seems to be having a good try. 
Entering you in that tournament would have been very 
risky, especially right under Dumbledore’ s nose. 

Be on the watch, Harry. I still want to hear about 
anything unusual. Let me know about the 22nd of 
November as quickly as you can. 

Sirius 



Page | 346 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 








THE HUNGARIAN HORNTAIL 

The prospect of talking face-to-face with Sirius was all 
that sustained Harry over the next fortnight, the only 
bright spot on a horizon that had never looked 
darker. The shock of finding himself school champion 
had worn off slightly now, and the fear of what was 
facing him had started to sink in. The first task was 
drawing steadily nearer; he felt as though it were 
crouching ahead of him like some horrific monster, 
barring his path. He had never suffered nerves like 
these; they were way beyond anything he had 
experienced before a Quidditch match, not even his 
last one against Slytherin, which had decided who 
would win the Quidditch Cup. Harry was finding it 
hard to think about the future at all; he felt as though 
his whole life had been leading up to, and would 
finish with, the first task. ... 

Admittedly, he didn’t see how Sirius was going to 
make him feel any better about having to perform an 
unknown piece of difficult and dangerous magic in 
front of hundreds of people, but the mere sight of a 
friendly face would be something at the moment. 

Page | 347 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



Harry wrote back to Sirius saying that he would be 
beside the common room fire at the time Sirius had 
suggested, and he and Hermione spent a long time 
going over plans for forcing any stragglers out of the 
common room on the night in question. If the worst 
came to the worst, they were going to drop a bag of 
Dungbombs, but they hoped they wouldn’t have to 
resort to that — Filch would skin them alive. 

In the meantime, life became even worse for Harry 
within the confines of the castle, for Rita Skeeter had 
published her piece about the Triwizard Tournament, 
and it had turned out to be not so much a report on 
the tournament as a highly colored life story of Harry. 
Much of the front page had been given over to a 
picture of Harry; the article (continuing on pages two, 
six, and seven) had been all about Harry, the names 
of the Beauxbatons and Durmstrang champions 
(misspelled) had been squashed into the last line of 
the article, and Cedric hadn’t been mentioned at all. 

The article had appeared ten days ago, and Harry still 
got a sick, burning feeling of shame in his stomach 
every time he thought about it. Rita Skeeter had 
reported him saying an awful lot of things that he 
couldn’t remember ever saying in his life, let alone in 
that broom cupboard. 

I suppose I get my strength from my parents. I know 
they’d be very proud of me if they could see me now. 

... Yes, sometimes at night I still cry about them, I’m 
not ashamed to admit it. ... I know nothing will hurt 
me during the tournament, because they’re watching 
over me. ... 

But Rita Skeeter had gone even further than 
transforming his “er’s” into long, sickly sentences: 

She had interviewed other people about him too. 



Page | 348 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry has at last found love at Hogwarts. His close 
friend, Colin Creevey, says that Harry is rarely seen 
out of the company of one Hermione Granger, a 
stunningly pretty Muggle-born girl who, like Harry, is 
one of the top students in the school. 

From the moment the article had appeared, Harry 
had had to endure people — Slytherins, mainly — 
quoting it at him as he passed and making sneering 
comments. 

“Want a hanky, Potter, in case you start crying in 
Transfiguration?” 

“Since when have you been one of the top students in 
the school, Potter? Or is this a school you and 
Longbottom have set up together?” 

“Hey — Harry!” 

“Yeah, that’s right!” Harry found himself shouting as 
he wheeled around in the corridor, having had just 
about enough. “I’ve just been crying my eyes out over 
my dead mum, and I’m just off to do a bit more. ...” 

“No — it was just — you dropped your quill.” 

It was Cho. Harry felt the color rising in his face. 

“Oh — right — sorry,” he muttered, taking the quill 
back. 

“Er ... good luck on Tuesday,” she said. “I really hope 
you do well.” 

Which left Harry feeling extremely stupid. 

Hermione had come in for her fair share of 
unpleasantness too, but she hadn’t yet started yelling 

Page | 349 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




at innocent bystanders; in fact, Harry was full of 
admiration for the way she was handling the 
situation. 

“ Stunningly pretty? Her?” Pansy Parkinson had 
shrieked the first time she had come face-to-face with 
Hermione after Rita’s article had appeared. “What was 
she judging against — a chipmunk?” 

“Ignore it,” Hermione said in a dignified voice, holding 
her head in the air and stalking past the sniggering 
Slytherin girls as though she couldn’t hear them. 

“Just ignore it, Harry.” 

But Harry couldn’t ignore it. Ron hadn’t spoken to 
him at all since he had told him about Snape’s 
detentions. Harry had half hoped they would make 
things up during the two hours they were forced to 
pickle rats’ brains in Snape’s dungeon, but that had 
been the day Rita’s article had appeared, which 
seemed to have confirmed Ron’s belief that Harry was 
really enjoying all the attention. 

Hermione was furious with the pair of them; she went 
from one to the other, trying to force them to talk to 
each other, but Harry was adamant: He would talk to 
Ron again only if Ron admitted that Harry hadn’t put 
his name in the Goblet of Fire and apologized for 
calling him a liar. 

“I didn’t start this,” Harry said stubbornly. “It’s his 
problem.” 

“You miss him!” Hermione said impatiently. “And I 
know he misses you — ” 

“Miss him?” said Harry. “I don’t miss him. ...” 



Page | 350 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But this was a downright lie. Harry liked Hermione 
very much, but she just wasn’t the same as Ron. 

There was much less laughter and a lot more hanging 
around in the library when Hermione was your best 
friend. Harry still hadn’t mastered Summoning 
Charms, he seemed to have developed something of a 
block about them, and Hermione insisted that 
learning the theory would help. They consequently 
spent a lot of time poring over books during their 
lunchtimes. 

Viktor Krum was in the library an awful lot too, and 
Harry wondered what he was up to. Was he studying, 
or was he looking for things to help him through the 
first task? Hermione often complained about Krum 
being there — not that he ever bothered them — but 
because groups of giggling girls often turned up to spy 
on him from behind bookshelves, and Hermione 
found the noise distracting. 

“He’s not even good-looking!” she muttered angrily, 
glaring at Krum’s sharp profile. “They only like him 
because he’s famous! They wouldn’t look twice at him 
if he couldn’t do that Wonky- Faint thing — ” 

“Wronski Feint,” said Harry, through gritted teeth. 
Quite apart from liking to get Quidditch terms 
correct, it caused him another pang to imagine Ron’s 
expression if he could have heard Hermione talking 
about Wonky- Faints. 

It is a strange thing, but when you are dreading 
something, and would give anything to slow down 
time, it has a disobliging habit of speeding up. The 
days until the first task seemed to slip by as though 
someone had fixed the clocks to work at double 
speed. Harry’s feeling of barely controlled panic was 
with him wherever he went, as everpresent as the 
snide comments about the Daily Prophet article. 

Page | 351 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




On the Saturday before the first task, all students in 
the third year and above were permitted to visit the 
village of Hogsmeade. Hermione told Harry that it 
would do him good to get away from the castle for a 
bit, and Harry didn’t need much persuasion. 

“What about Ron, though?” he said. “Don’t you want 
to go with him?” 

“Oh ... well ...” Hermione went slightly pink. “I 
thought we might meet up with him in the Three 
Broomsticks. ...” 

“No,” said Harry flatly. 

“Oh Harry, this is so stupid — ” 

“I’ll come, but I’m not meeting Ron, and I’m wearing 
my Invisibility Cloak.” 

“Oh all right then ...” Hermione snapped, “but I hate 
talking to you in that cloak, I never know if I’m 
looking at you or not.” 

So Harry put on his Invisibility Cloak in the 
dormitory, went back downstairs, and together he 
and Hermione set off for Hogsmeade. 

Harry felt wonderfully free under the cloak; he 
watched other students walking past them as they 
entered the village, most of them sporting Support 
Cedric Diggory\ badges, but no horrible remarks came 
his way for a change, and nobody was quoting that 
stupid article. 

“People keep looking at me now,” said Hermione 
grumpily as they came out of Honeydukes Sweetshop 
later, eating large cream-filled chocolates. “They think 
I’m talking to myself.” 

Page | 352 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t move your lips so much then.” 



“Come on, please just take off your cloak for a bit, no 
one’s going to bother you here.” 

“Oh yeah?” said Harry. “Look behind you.” 

Rita Skeeter and her photographer friend had just 
emerged from the Three Broomsticks pub. Talking in 
low voices, they passed right by Hermione without 
looking at her. Harry backed into the wall of 
Honeydukes to stop Rita Skeeter from hitting him 
with her crocodile-skin handbag. When they were 
gone, Harry said, “She’s staying in the village. I bet 
she’s coming to watch the first task.” 

As he said it, his stomach flooded with a wave of 
molten panic. He didn’t mention this; he and 
Hermione hadn’t discussed what was coming in the 
first task much; he had the feeling she didn’t want to 
think about it. 

“She’s gone,” said Hermione, looking right through 
Harry toward the end of the street. “Why don’t we go 
and have a butterbeer in the Three Broomsticks, it’s a 
bit cold, isn’t it? You don’t have to talk to Ron!” she 
added irritably, correctly interpreting his silence. 

The Three Broomsticks was packed, mainly with 
Hogwarts students enjoying their free afternoon, but 
also with a variety of magical people Harry rarely saw 
anywhere else. Harry supposed that as Hogsmeade 
was the only all-wizard village in Britain, it was a bit 
of a haven for creatures like hags, who were not as 
adept as wizards at disguising themselves. 

It was very hard to move through crowds in the 
Invisibility Cloak, in case you accidentally trod on 
someone, which tended to lead to awkward questions. 

Page | 353 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry edged slowly toward a spare table in the corner 
while Hermione went to buy drinks. On his way 
through the pub, Harry spotted Ron, who was sitting 
with Fred, George, and Lee Jordan. Resisting the urge 
to give Ron a good hard poke in the back of the head, 
he finally reached the table and sat down at it. 

Hermione joined him a moment later and slipped him 
a butterbeer under his cloak. 

“I look like such an idiot, sitting here on my own,” she 
muttered. “Lucky I brought something to do.” 

And she pulled out a notebook in which she had been 
keeping a record of S.P.E.W. members. Harry saw his 
and Ron’s names at the top of the very short list. It 
seemed a long time ago that they had sat making up 
those predictions together, and Hermione had turned 
up and appointed them secretary and treasurer. 

“You know, maybe I should try and get some of the 
villagers involved in S.P.E.W.,” Hermione said 
thoughtfully, looking around the pub. 

“Yeah, right,” said Harry. He took a swig of butterbeer 
under his cloak. “Hermione, when are you going to 
give up on this spew stuff?” 

“When house-elves have decent wages and working 
conditions!” she hissed back. “You know, I’m starting 
to think it’s time for more direct action. I wonder how 
you get into the school kitchens?” 

“No idea, ask Fred and George,” said Harry. 

Hermione lapsed into thoughtful silence, while Harry 
drank his butterbeer, watching the people in the pub. 
All of them looked cheerful and relaxed. Ernie 
Macmillan and Hannah Abbott were swapping 

Page | 354 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Chocolate Frog cards at a nearby table; both of them 
sporting Support Cedric Diggory\ badges on their 
cloaks. Right over by the door he saw Cho and a large 
group of her Ravenclaw friends. She wasn’t wearing a 
Cedric badge though. ... This cheered up Harry very 
slightly. ... 

What wouldn’t he have given to be one of these 
people, sitting around laughing and talking, with 
nothing to worry about but homework? He imagined 
how it would have felt to be here if his name hadn’t 
come out of the Goblet of Fire. He wouldn’t be wearing 
the Invisibility Cloak, for one thing. Ron would be 
sitting with him. The three of them would probably be 
happily imagining what deadly dangerous task the 
school champions would be facing on Tuesday. He’d 
have been really looking forward to it, watching them 
do whatever it was . . . cheering on Cedric with 
everyone else, safe in a seat at the back of the stands. 



He wondered how the other champions were feeling. 
Every time he had seen Cedric lately, he had been 
surrounded by admirers and looking nervous but 
excited. Harry glimpsed Fleur Delacour from time to 
time in the corridors; she looked exactly as she 
always did, haughty and unruffled. And Krum just 
sat in the library, poring over books. 

Harry thought of Sirius, and the tight, tense knot in 
his chest seemed to ease slightly. He would be 
speaking to him in just over twelve hours, for tonight 
was the night they were meeting at the common room 
fire — assuming nothing went wrong, as everything 
else had done lately. ... 

“Look, it’s Hagrid!” said Hermione. 



Page | 355 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The back of Hagrid ’s enormous shaggy head — he 
had mercifully abandoned his bunches — emerged 
over the crowd. Harry wondered why he hadn’t 
spotted him at once, as Hagrid was so large, but 
standing up carefully, he saw that Hagrid had been 
leaning low, talking to Professor Moody. Hagrid had 
his usual enormous tankard in front of him, but 
Moody was drinking from his hip flask. Madam 
Rosmerta, the pretty landlady, didn’t seem to think 
much of this; she was looking askance at Moody as 
she collected glasses from tables around them. 
Perhaps she thought it was an insult to her mulled 
mead, but Harry knew better. Moody had told them 
all during their last Defense Against the Dark Arts 
lesson that he preferred to prepare his own food and 
drink at all times, as it was so easy for Dark wizards 
to poison an unattended cup. 

As Harry watched, he saw Hagrid and Moody get up 
to leave. He waved, then remembered that Hagrid 
couldn’t see him. Moody, however, paused, his 
magical eye on the corner where Harry was standing. 
He tapped Hagrid in the small of the back (being 
unable to reach his shoulder), muttered something to 
him, and then the pair of them made their way back 
across the pub toward Harry and Hermione’s table. 

“All right, Hermione?” said Hagrid loudly. 

“Hello,” said Hermione, smiling back. 

Moody limped around the table and bent down; Harry 
thought he was reading the S.P.E.W. notebook, until 
he muttered, “Nice cloak, Potter.” 

Harry stared at him in amazement. The large chunk 
missing from Moody’s nose was particularly obvious 
at a few inches’ distance. Moody grinned. 



Page | 356 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Can your eye — I mean, can you — ?” 



“Yeah, it can see through Invisibility Cloaks,” Moody 
said quietly. “And it’s come in useful at times, I can 
tell you.” 

Hagrid was beaming down at Harry too. Harry knew 
Hagrid couldn’t see him, but Moody had obviously 
told Hagrid he was there. Hagrid now bent down on 
the pretext of reading the S.P.E.W. notebook as well, 
and said in a whisper so low that only Harry could 
hear it, “Harry, meet me tonight at midnight at me 
cabin. Wear that cloak.” 

Straightening up, Hagrid said loudly, “Nice ter see 
yeh, Hermione,” winked, and departed. Moody 
followed him. 

“Why does Hagrid want me to meet him at midnight?” 
Harry said, very surprised. 

“Does he?” said Hermione, looking startled. “I wonder 
what he’s up to? I don’t know whether you should go, 
Harry. ...” She looked nervously around and hissed, 

“It might make you late for Sirius.” 

It was true that going down to Hagrid ’s at midnight 
would mean cutting his meeting with Sirius very fine 
indeed; Hermione suggested sending Hedwig down to 
Hagrid ’s to tell him he couldn’t go — always assuming 
she would consent to take the note, of course — 

Harry, however, thought it better just to be quick at 
whatever Hagrid wanted him for. He was very curious 
to know what this might be; Hagrid had never asked 
Harry to visit him so late at night. 

At half past eleven that evening, Harry, who had 
pretended to go up to bed early, pulled the Invisibility 
Cloak back over himself and crept back downstairs 

Page | 357 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




through the common room. Quite a few people were 
still in there. The Creevey brothers had managed to 
get hold of a stack of Support Cedric Diggoryl badges 
and were trying to bewitch them to make them say 
Support Harry Potter\ instead. So far, however, all they 
had managed to do was get the badges stuck on 
POTTER STINKS. Harry crept past them to the portrait 
hole and waited for a minute or so, keeping an eye on 
his watch. Then Hermione opened the Fat Lady for 
him from outside as they had planned. He slipped 
past her with a whispered “Thanks!” and set off 
through the castle. 

The grounds were very dark. Harry walked down the 
lawn toward the lights shining in Hagrid’s cabin. The 
inside of the enormous Beauxbatons carriage was 
also lit up; Harry could hear Madame Maxime talking 
inside it as he knocked on Hagrid’s front door. 

“You there, Harry?” Hagrid whispered, opening the 
door and looking around. 

“Yeah,” said Harry, slipping inside the cabin and 
pulling the cloak down off his head. “What’s up?” 

“Got summat ter show yeh,” said Hagrid. 

There was an air of enormous excitement about 
Hagrid. He was wearing a flower that resembled an 
oversized artichoke in his buttonhole. It looked as 
though he had abandoned the use of axle grease, but 
he had certainly attempted to comb his hair — Harry 
could see the comb’s broken teeth tangled in it. 

“What’re you showing me?” Harry said warily, 
wondering if the skrewts had laid eggs, or Hagrid had 
managed to buy another giant three-headed dog off a 
stranger in a pub. 



Page | 358 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Come with me, keep quiet, an’ keep yerself covered 
with that cloak,” said Hagrid. “We won’ take Fang, he 
won’ like it. ...” 

“Listen, Hagrid, I can’t stay long. ... I’ve got to be back 
up at the castle by one o’clock — ” 

But Hagrid wasn’t listening; he was opening the cabin 
door and striding off into the night. Harry hurried to 
follow and found, to his great surprise, that Hagrid 
was leading him to the Beauxbatons carriage. 

“Hagrid, what — ?” 

“Shhh!” said Hagrid, and he knocked three times on 
the door bearing the crossed golden wands. 

Madame Maxime opened it. She was wearing a silk 
shawl wrapped around her massive shoulders. She 
smiled when she saw Hagrid. 

“Ah, ’Agrid ... it is time?” 

“Bong-sewer,” said Hagrid, beaming at her, and 
holding out a hand to help her down the golden steps. 

Madame Maxime closed the door behind her, Hagrid 
offered her his arm, and they set off around the edge 
of the paddock containing Madame Maxime ’s giant 
winged horses, with Harry, totally bewildered, 
running to keep up with them. Had Hagrid wanted to 
show him Madame Maxime? He could see her any old 
time he wanted ... she wasn’t exactly hard to miss. ... 

But it seemed that Madame Maxime was in for the 
same treat as Harry, because after a while she said 
playfully, “Wair is it you are taking me, ’Agrid?” 



Page | 359 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeh’ll enjoy this,” said Hagrid gruffly, “worth seem’, 
trust me. On’y — don’ go tellin’ anyone I showed yeh, 
right? Yeh’re not s’posed ter know.” 

“Of course not,” said Madame Maxime, fluttering her 
long black eyelashes. 

And still they walked, Harry getting more and more 
irritated as he jogged along in their wake, checking 
his watch every now and then. Hagrid had some 
harebrained scheme in hand, which might make him 
miss Sirius. If they didn’t get there soon, he was going 
to turn around, go straight back to the castle, and 
leave Hagrid to enjoy his moonlit stroll with Madame 
Maxime. ... 

But then — when they had walked so far around the 
perimeter of the forest that the castle and the lake 
were out of sight — Harry heard something. Men were 
shouting up ahead . . . then came a deafening, 
earsplitting roar. . . . 

Hagrid led Madame Maxime around a clump of trees 
and came to a halt. Harry hurried up alongside them 
— for a split second, he thought he was seeing 
bonfires, and men darting around them — and then 
his mouth fell open. 

Dragons. 

Four fully grown, enormous, vicious-looking dragons 
were rearing onto their hind legs inside an enclosure 
fenced with thick planks of wood, roaring and 
snorting — torrents of fire were shooting into the dark 
sky from their open, fanged mouths, fifty feet above 
the ground on their outstretched necks. There was a 
silvery-blue one with long, pointed horns, snapping 
and snarling at the wizards on the ground; a smooth- 
scaled green one, which was writhing and stamping 
Page | 360 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




with all its might; a red one with an odd fringe of fine 
gold spikes around its face, which was shooting 
mushroom-shaped fire clouds into the air; and a 
gigantic black one, more lizard-like than the others, 
which was nearest to them. 

At least thirty wizards, seven or eight to each dragon, 
were attempting to control them, pulling on the 
chains connected to heavy leather straps around their 
necks and legs. Mesmerized, Harry looked up, high 
above him, and saw the eyes of the black dragon, with 
vertical pupils like a cat’s, bulging with either fear or 
rage, he couldn’t tell which. ... It was making a 
horrible noise, a yowling, screeching scream. ... 

“Keep back there, Hagrid!” yelled a wizard near the 
fence, straining on the chain he was holding. “They 
can shoot fire at a range of twenty feet, you know! I’ve 
seen this Horntail do forty!” 

“Is’n’ it beautiful?” said Hagrid softly. 

“It’s no good!” yelled another wizard. “Stunning 
Spells, on the count of three!” 

Harry saw each of the dragon keepers pull out his 
wand. 

“Stupefy\” they shouted in unison, and the Stunning 
Spells shot into the darkness like fiery rockets, 
bursting in showers of stars on the dragons’ scaly 
hides — 

Harry watched the dragon nearest to them teeter 
dangerously on its back legs; its jaws stretched wide 
in a silent howl; its nostrils were suddenly devoid of 
flame, though still smoking — then, very slowly, it 
fell. Several tons of sinewy, scaly-black dragon hit the 



Page | 361 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




ground with a thud that Harry could have sworn 
made the trees behind him quake. 



The dragon keepers lowered their wands and walked 
forward to their fallen charges, each of which was the 
size of a small hill. They hurried to tighten the chains 
and fasten them securely to iron pegs, which they 
forced deep into the ground with their wands. 

“Wan’ a closer look?” Hagrid asked Madame Maxime 
excitedly. The pair of them moved right up to the 
fence, and Harry followed. The wizard who had 
warned Hagrid not to come any closer turned, and 
Harry realized who it was: Charlie Weasley. 

“All right, Hagrid?” he panted, coming over to talk. 
“They should be okay now — we put them out with a 
Sleeping Draft on the way here, thought it might be 
better for them to wake up in the dark and the quiet 
— but, like you saw, they weren’t happy, not happy at 
all — ” 



“What breeds you got here, Charlie?” said Hagrid, 
gazing at the closest dragon, the black one, with 
something close to reverence. Its eyes were still just 
open. Harry could see a strip of gleaming yellow 
beneath its wrinkled black eyelid. 

“This is a Hungarian Horntail,” said Charlie. “There’s 
a Common Welsh Green over there, the smaller one — 
a Swedish Short-Snout, that blue-gray — and a 
Chinese Fireball, that’s the red.” 

Charlie looked around; Madame Maxime was strolling 
away around the edge of the enclosure, gazing at the 
stunned dragons. 

“I didn’t know you were bringing her, Hagrid,” Charlie 
said, frowning. “The champions aren’t supposed to 

Page | 362 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




know what’s coming — she’s bound to tell her 
student, isn’t she?” 



“Jus’ thought she’d like ter see ’em,” shrugged Hagrid, 
still gazing, enraptured, at the dragons. 

“Really romantic date, Hagrid,” said Charlie, shaking 
his head. 

“Four ...” said Hagrid, “so it’s one fer each o’ the 
champions, is it? What’ve they gotta do — fight ’em?” 

“Just get past them, I think,” said Charlie. “We’ll be 
on hand if it gets nasty, Extinguishing Spells at the 
ready. They wanted nesting mothers, I don’t know 
why ... but I tell you this, I don’t envy the one who 
gets the Horntail. Vicious thing. Its back end’s as 
dangerous as its front, look.” 

Charlie pointed toward the Horntail’s tail, and Harry 
saw long, bronze-colored spikes protruding along it 
every few inches. 

Five of Charlie’s fellow keepers staggered up to the 
Horntail at that moment, carrying a clutch of huge 
granite-gray eggs between them in a blanket. They 
placed them carefully at the Horntail’s side. Hagrid let 
out a moan of longing. 

“I’ve got them counted, Hagrid,” said Charlie sternly. 
Then he said, “How’s Harry?” 

“Fine,” said Hagrid. He was still gazing at the eggs. 

“Just hope he’s still fine after he’s faced this lot,” said 
Charlie grimly, looking out over the dragons’ 
enclosure. “I didn’t dare tell Mum what he’s got to do 
for the first task; she’s already having kittens about 
him. ...” Charlie imitated his mother’s anxious voice. “ 
Page | 363 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




‘ How could they let him enter that tournament, he’s 
much too young\ I thought they were all safe, I thought 
there was going to he an age limiti ’ She was in floods 
after that Daily Prophet article about him. ‘He still 
cries about his parents\ Oh bless him, I never knew\ ’ ” 

Harry had had enough. Trusting to the fact that 
Hagrid wouldn’t miss him, with the attractions of four 
dragons and Madame Maxime to occupy him, he 
turned silently and began to walk away, back to the 
castle. 

He didn’t know whether he was glad he’d seen what 
was coming or not. Perhaps this way was better. The 
first shock was over now. Maybe if he’d seen the 
dragons for the first time on Tuesday, he would have 
passed out cold in front of the whole school ... but 
maybe he would anyway. ... He was going to be armed 
with his wand — which, just now, felt like nothing 
more than a narrow strip of wood — against a fifty- 
foot-high, scaly, spike-ridden, fire-breathing dragon. 
And he had to get past it. With everyone watching. 
How? 

Harry sped up, skirting the edge of the forest; he had 
just under fifteen minutes to get back to the fireside 
and talk to Sirius, and he couldn’t remember, ever, 
wanting to talk to someone more than he did right 
now — when, without warning, he ran into something 
very solid. 

Harry fell backward, his glasses askew, clutching the 
cloak around him. A voice nearby said, “Ouch! Who’s 
there?” 

Harry hastily checked that the cloak was covering 
him and lay very still, staring up at the dark outline 
of the wizard he had hit. He recognized the goatee ... 
it was Karkaroff. 

Page | 364 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Who’s there?” said Karkaroff again, very 
suspiciously, looking around in the darkness. Harry 
remained still and silent. After a minute or so, 
Karkaroff seemed to decide that he had hit some sort 
of animal; he was looking around at waist height, as 
though expecting to see a dog. Then he crept back 
under the cover of the trees and started to edge 
forward toward the place where the dragons were. 

Very slowly and very carefully, Harry got to his feet 
and set off again as fast as he could without making 
too much noise, hurrying through the darkness back 
toward Hogwarts. 

He had no doubt whatsoever what Karkaroff was up 
to. He had sneaked off his ship to try and find out 
what the first task was going to be. He might even 
have spotted Hagrid and Madame Maxime heading off 
around the forest together — they were hardly 
difficult to spot at a distance . . . and now all Karkaroff 
had to do was follow the sound of voices, and he, like 
Madame Maxime, would know what was in store for 
the champions. 

By the looks of it, the only champion who would be 
facing the unknown on Tuesday was Cedric. 

Harry reached the castle, slipped in through the front 
doors, and began to climb the marble stairs; he was 
very out of breath, but he didn’t dare slow down. ... 

He had less than five minutes to get up to the fire. ... 

“Balderdash!” he gasped at the Fat Lady, who was 
snoozing in her frame in front of the portrait hole. 

“If you say so,” she muttered sleepily, without opening 
her eyes, and the picture swung forward to admit 
him. Harry climbed inside. The common room was 
deserted, and, judging by the fact that it smelled quite 

Page | 365 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




normal, Hermione had not needed to set off any 
Dungbombs to ensure that he and Sirius got privacy. 

Harry pulled off the Invisibility Cloak and threw 
himself into an armchair in front of the fire. The room 
was in semidarkness; the flames were the only source 
of light. Nearby, on a table, the Support Cedric 
Diggoryl badges the Creeveys had been trying to 
improve were glinting in the firelight. They now read 
POTTER REALLY STINKS. Harry looked back into the 
flames, and jumped. 

Sirius’s head was sitting in the fire. If Harry hadn’t 
seen Mr. Diggory do exactly this back in the Weasleys’ 
kitchen, it would have scared him out of his wits. 
Instead, his face breaking into the first smile he had 
worn for days, he scrambled out of his chair, 
crouched down by the hearth, and said, “Sirius — 
how ’re you doing?” 

Sirius looked different from Harry’s memory of him. 
When they had said good-bye, Sirius’s face had been 
gaunt and sunken, surrounded by a quantity of long, 
black, matted hair — but the hair was short and 
clean now, Sirius’s face was fuller, and he looked 
younger, much more like the only photograph Harry 
had of him, which had been taken at the Potters’ 
wedding. 

“Never mind me, how are you?” said Sirius seriously. 

“I’m — ” For a second, Harry tried to say “fine” — but 
he couldn’t do it. Before he could stop himself, he was 
talking more than he’d talked in days — about how 
no one believed he hadn’t entered the tournament of 
his own free will, how Rita Skeeter had lied about him 
in the Daily Prophet, how he couldn’t walk down a 
corridor without being sneered at — and about Ron, 
Ron not believing him, Ron’s jealousy ... 

Page | 366 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




"... and now Hagrid’s just shown me what’s coming in 
the first task, and it’s dragons, Sirius, and I’m a 
goner,” he finished desperately. 

Sirius looked at him, eyes full of concern, eyes that 
had not yet lost the look that Azkaban had given 
them — that deadened, haunted look. He had let 
Harry talk himself into silence without interruption, 
but now he said, “Dragons we can deal with, Harry, 
but we’ll get to that in a minute — I haven’t got long 
here ... I’ve broken into a wizarding house to use the 
fire, but they could be back at any time. There are 
things I need to warn you about.” 

“What?” said Harry, feeling his spirits slip a further 
few notches. ... Surely there could be nothing worse 
than dragons coming? 

“Karkaroff,” said Sirius. “Harry, he was a Death Eater. 
You know what Death Eaters are, don’t you?” 

“Yes — he — what?” 

“He was caught, he was in Azkaban with me, but he 
got released. I’d bet everything that’s why Dumbledore 
wanted an Auror at Hogwarts this year — to keep an 
eye on him. Moody caught Karkaroff. Put him into 
Azkaban in the first place.” 

“Karkaroff got released?” Harry said slowly — his 
brain seemed to be struggling to absorb yet another 
piece of shocking information. “Why did they release 
him?” 

“He did a deal with the Ministry of Magic,” said Sirius 
bitterly. “He said he’d seen the error of his ways, and 
then he named names ... he put a load of other people 
into Azkaban in his place. ... He’s not very popular in 
there, I can tell you. And since he got out, from what I 
Page | 367 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




can tell, he’s been teaching the Dark Arts to every 
student who passes through that school of his. So 
watch out for the Durmstrang champion as well.” 

“Okay,” said Harry slowly. “But ... are you saying 
Karkaroff put my name in the goblet? Because if he 
did, he’s a really good actor. He seemed furious about 
it. He wanted to stop me from competing.” 

“We know he’s a good actor,” said Sirius, “because he 
convinced the Ministry of Magic to set him free, didn’t 
he? Now, I’ve been keeping an eye on the Daily 
Prophet, Harry — ” 

“ — you and the rest of the world,” said Harry bitterly. 

“ — and reading between the lines of that Skeeter 
woman’s article last month, Moody was attacked the 
night before he started at Hogwarts. Yes, I know she 
says it was another false alarm,” Sirius said hastily, 
seeing Harry about to speak, “but I don’t think so, 
somehow. I think someone tried to stop him from 
getting to Hogwarts. I think someone knew their job 
would be a lot more difficult with him around. And no 
one’s going to look into it too closely; Mad-Eye’s heard 
intruders a bit too often. But that doesn’t mean he 
can’t still spot the real thing. Moody was the best 
Auror the Ministry ever had.” 

“So . . . what are you saying?” said Harry slowly. 
“Karkaroff’s trying to kill me? But — why?” 

Sirius hesitated. 

“I’ve been hearing some very strange things,” he said 
slowly. “The Death Eaters seem to be a bit more active 
than usual lately. They showed themselves at the 
Quidditch World Cup, didn’t they? Someone set off 



Page | 368 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the Dark Mark . . . and then — did you hear about that 
Ministry of Magic witch who’s gone missing?” 

“Bertha Jorkins?” said Harry. 

“Exactly ... she disappeared in Albania, and that’s 
definitely where Voldemort was rumored to be last ... 
and she would have known the Triwizard Tournament 
was coming up, wouldn’t she?” 

“Yeah, but ... it’s not very likely she’d have walked 
straight into Voldemort, is it?” said Harry. 

“Listen, I knew Bertha Jorkins,” said Sirius grimly. 
“She was at Hogwarts when I was, a few years above 
your dad and me. And she was an idiot. Very nosy, 
but no brains, none at all. It’s not a good 
combination, Harry. I’d say she’d be very easy to lure 
into a trap. 

“So ... so Voldemort could have found out about the 
tournament?” said Harry. “Is that what you mean? 
You think Karkaroff might be here on his orders?” 

“I don’t know,” said Sirius slowly, “I just don’t know 
... Karkaroff doesn’t strike me as the type who’d go 
back to Voldemort unless he knew Voldemort was 
powerful enough to protect him. But whoever put 
your name in that goblet did it for a reason, and I 
can’t help thinking the tournament would be a very 
good way to attack you and make it look like an 
accident.” 

“Looks like a really good plan from where I’m 
standing,” said Harry grinning bleakly. “They’ll just 
have to stand back and let the dragons do their stuff.” 

“Right — these dragons,” said Sirius, speaking very 
quickly now. “There’s a way, Harry. Don’t be tempted 

Page | 369 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




to try a Stunning Spell — dragons are strong and too 
powerfully magical to be knocked out by a single 
Stunner, you need about half a dozen wizards at a 
time to overcome a dragon — ” 

“Yeah, I know, I just saw,” said Harry. 

“But you can do it alone,” said Sirius. “There is a way, 
and a simple spell’s all you need. Just — ” 

But Harry held up a hand to silence him, his heart 
suddenly pounding as though it would burst. He 
could hear footsteps coming down the spiral staircase 
behind him. 

“Go!” he hissed at Sirius. “Go! There’s someone 
coming!” 

Harry scrambled to his feet, hiding the fire — if 
someone saw Sirius’s face within the walls of 
Hogwarts, they would raise an almighty uproar — the 
Ministry would get dragged in — he, Harry, would be 
questioned about Sirius’s whereabouts — 

Harry heard a tiny pop\ in the fire behind him and 
knew Sirius had gone. He watched the bottom of the 
spiral staircase. Who had decided to go for a stroll at 
one o’clock in the morning, and stopped Sirius from 
telling him how to get past a dragon? 

It was Ron. Dressed in his maroon paisley pajamas, 
Ron stopped dead facing Harry across the room, and 
looked around. 

“Who were you talking to?” he said. 

“What’s that got to do with you?” Harry snarled. 

“What are you doing down here at this time of night?” 



Page | 370 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I just wondered where you — ” Ron broke off, 
shrugging. “Nothing. I’m going back to bed.” 

“Just thought you’d come nosing around, did you?” 
Harry shouted. He knew that Ron had no idea what 
he’d walked in on, knew he hadn’t done it on purpose, 
but he didn’t care — at this moment he hated 
everything about Ron, right down to the several 
inches of bare ankle showing beneath his pajama 
trousers. 

“Sorry about that,” said Ron, his face reddening with 
anger. “Should’ve realized you didn’t want to be 
disturbed. I’ll let you get on with practicing for your 
next interview in peace.” 

Harry seized one of the POTTER REALLY STINKS 
badges off the table and chucked it, as hard as he 
could, across the room. It hit Ron on the forehead 
and bounced off. 

“There you go,” Harry said. “Something for you to 
wear on Tuesday. You might even have a scar now, if 
you’re lucky. ... That’s what you want, isn’t it?” 

He strode across the room toward the stairs; he half 
expected Ron to stop him, he would even have liked 
Ron to throw a punch at him, but Ron just stood 
there in his too-small pajamas, and Harry, having 
stormed upstairs, lay awake in bed fuming for a long 
time afterward and didn’t hear him come up to bed. 



Page | 371 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE FIRST TASK 

Harry got up on Sunday morning and dressed so 
inattentively that it was a while before he realized he 
was trying to pull his hat onto his foot instead of his 
sock. When he’d finally got all his clothes on the right 
parts of his body, he hurried off to find Hermione, 
locating her at the Gryffindor table in the Great Hall, 
where she was eating breakfast with Ginny. Feeling 
too queasy to eat, Harry waited until Hermione had 
swallowed her last spoonful of porridge, then dragged 
her out onto the grounds. There, he told her all about 
the dragons, and about everything Sirius had said, 
while they took another long walk around the lake. 

Alarmed as she was by Sirius’s warnings about 
Karkaroff, Hermione still thought that the dragons 
were the more pressing problem. 

“Let’s just try and keep you alive until Tuesday 
evening,” she said desperately, “and then we can 
worry about Karkaroff.” 



Page | 372 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



They walked three times around the lake, trying all 
the way to think of a simple spell that would subdue 
a dragon. Nothing whatsoever occurred to them, so 
they retired to the library instead. Here, Harry pulled 
down every book he could find on dragons, and both 
of them set to work searching through the large pile. 

“ ‘Talon-clipping by charms ... treating scale-rot ...’ 

This is no good, this is for nutters like Hagrid who 
want to keep them healthy. ...” 

“ ‘Dragons are extremely difficult to slay, owing to the 
ancient magic that imbues their thick hides, which 
none but the most powerful spells can penetrate ...’ 

But Sirius said a simple one would do it. ...” 

“Let’s try some simple spellbooks, then,” said Harry, 
throwing aside Men Who Love Dragons Too Much. 

He returned to the table with a pile of spellbooks, set 
them down, and began to flick through each in turn, 
Hermione whispering nonstop at his elbow. 

“Well, there are Switching Spells ... but what’s the 
point of Switching it? Unless you swapped its fangs 
for wine-gums or something that would make it less 
dangerous. ... The trouble is, like that book said, not 
much is going to get through a dragon’s hide. ... I’d 
say Transfigure it, but something that big, you really 
haven’t got a hope, I doubt even Professor McGonagall 
... unless you’re supposed to put the spell on 
yourself? Maybe to give yourself extra powers? But 
they’re not simple spells, I mean, we haven’t done any 
of those in class, I only know about them because I’ve 
been doing O.W.L. practice papers. ...” 

“Hermione,” Harry said, through gritted teeth, “will 
you shut up for a bit, please? I’m trying to 
concentrate.” 

Page | 373 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But all that happened, when Hermione fell silent, was 
that Harry’s brain filled with a sort of blank buzzing, 
which didn’t seem to allow room for concentration. He 
stared hopelessly down the index of Basic Hexes for 
the Busy and Vexed. Instant scalping . . . but dragons 
had no hair . . . pepper breath . . . that would probably 
increase a dragon’s firepower ... horn tongue ... just 
what he needed, to give it an extra weapon . . . 

“Oh no, he’s back again, why can’t he read on his 
stupid ship?” said Hermione irritably as Viktor Krum 
slouched in, cast a surly look over at the pair of them, 
and settled himself in a distant corner with a pile of 
books. “Come on, Harry, we’ll go back to the common 
room ... his fan club’ll be here in a moment, twittering 
away. ...” 

And sure enough, as they left the library, a gang of 
girls tiptoed past them, one of them wearing a 
Bulgaria scarf tied around her waist. 

Harry barely slept that night. When he awoke on 
Monday morning, he seriously considered for the first 
time ever just running away from Hogwarts. But as 
he looked around the Great Hall at breakfast time, 
and thought about what leaving the castle would 
mean, he knew he couldn’t do it. It was the only place 
he had ever been happy . . . well, he supposed he must 
have been happy with his parents too, but he couldn’t 
remember that. 

Somehow, the knowledge that he would rather be 
here and facing a dragon than back on Privet Drive 
with Dudley was good to know; it made him feel 
slightly calmer. He finished his bacon with difficulty 
(his throat wasn’t working too well), and as he and 
Hermione got up, he saw Cedric Diggory leaving the 
Hufflepuff table. 



Page | 374 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Cedric still didn’t know about the dragons ... the only 
champion who didn’t, if Harry was right in thinking 
that Maxime and Karkaroff would have told Fleur and 
Krum. ... 

“Hermione, I’ll see you in the greenhouses,” Harry 
said, coming to his decision as he watched Cedric 
leaving the Hall. “Go on, I’ll catch you up.” 

“Harry, you’ll be late, the bell’s about to ring — ” 

“I’ll catch you up, okay?” 

By the time Harry reached the bottom of the marble 
staircase, Cedric was at the top. He was with a load of 
sixth-year friends. Harry didn’t want to talk to Cedric 
in front of them; they were among those who had 
been quoting Rita Skeeter’s article at him every time 
he went near them. He followed Cedric at a distance 
and saw that he was heading toward the Charms 
corridor. This gave Harry an idea. Pausing at a 
distance from them, he pulled out his wand, and took 
careful aim. 

“Diffindol” 

Cedric’s bag split. Parchment, quills, and books 
spilled out of it onto the floor. Several bottles of ink 
smashed. 

“Don’t bother,” said Cedric in an exasperated voice as 
his friends bent down to help him. “Tell Flitwick I’m 
coming, go on. ...” 

This was exactly what Harry had been hoping for. He 
slipped his wand back into his robes, waited until 
Cedric’s friends had disappeared into their classroom, 
and hurried up the corridor, which was now empty of 
everyone but himself and Cedric. 

Page | 375 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Hi,” said Cedric, picking up a copy of A Guide to 
Advanced Transfiguration that was now splattered 
with ink. “My bag just split ... brand-new and all ...” 

“Cedric,” said Harry, “the first task is dragons.” 

“What?” said Cedric, looking up. 

“Dragons,” said Harry, speaking quickly, in case 
Professor Flitwick came out to see where Cedric had 
got to. “They’ve got four, one for each of us, and we’ve 
got to get past them.” 

Cedric stared at him. Harry saw some of the panic 
he’d been feeling since Saturday night flickering in 
Cedric’s gray eyes. 

“Are you sure?” Cedric said in a hushed voice. 

“Dead sure,” said Harry. “I’ve seen them.” 

“But how did you find out? We’re not supposed to 
know. ...” 

“Never mind,” said Harry quickly — he knew Hagrid 
would be in trouble if he told the truth. “But I’m not 
the only one who knows. Fleur and Krum will know 
by now — Maxime and Karkaroff both saw the 
dragons too.” 

Cedric straightened up, his arms full of inky quills, 
parchment, and books, his ripped bag dangling off 
one shoulder. He stared at Harry, and there was a 
puzzled, almost suspicious look in his eyes. 

“Why are you telling me?” he asked. 

Harry looked at him in disbelief. He was sure Cedric 
wouldn’t have asked that if he had seen the dragons 

Page | 376 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




himself. Harry wouldn’t have let his worst enemy face 
those monsters unprepared — well, perhaps Malfoy or 
Snape ... 

“It’s just ... fair, isn’t it?” he said to Cedric. “We all 
know now ... we’re on an even footing, aren’t we?” 

Cedric was still looking at him in a slightly suspicious 
way when Harry heard a familiar clunking noise 
behind him. He turned around and saw Mad-Eye 
Moody emerging from a nearby classroom. 

“Come with me, Potter,” he growled. “Diggory, off you 
go.” 

Harry stared apprehensively at Moody. Had he 
overheard them? 

“Er — Professor, I’m supposed to be in Herbology — ” 

“Never mind that, Potter. In my office, please. ...” 

Harry followed him, wondering what was going to 
happen to him now. What if Moody wanted to know 
how he’d found out about the dragons? Would Moody 
go to Dumbledore and tell on Hagrid, or just turn 
Harry into a ferret? Well, it might be easier to get past 
a dragon if he were a ferret, Harry thought dully, he’d 
be smaller, much less easy to see from a height of fifty 
feet ... 

He followed Moody into his office. Moody closed the 
door behind them and turned to look at Harry, his 
magical eye fixed upon him as well as the normal one. 

“That was a very decent thing you just did, Potter,” 
Moody said quietly. 



Page | 377 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry didn’t know what to say; this wasn’t the 
reaction he had expected at all. 



“Sit down,” said Moody, and Harry sat, looking 
around. 

He had visited this office under two of its previous 
occupants. In Professor Lockhart’s day, the walls had 
been plastered with beaming, winking pictures of 
Professor Lockhart himself. When Lupin had lived 
here, you were more likely to come across a specimen 
of some fascinating new Dark creature he had 
procured for them to study in class. Now, however, 
the office was full of a number of exceptionally odd 
objects that Harry supposed Moody had used in the 
days when he had been an Auror. 

On his desk stood what looked like a large, cracked, 
glass spinning top; Harry recognized it at once as a 
Sneakoscope, because he owned one himself, though 
it was much smaller than Moody’s. In the corner on a 
small table stood an object that looked something like 
an extra- squiggly, golden television aerial. It was 
humming slightly. What appeared to be a mirror hung 
opposite Harry on the wall, but it was not reflecting 
the room. Shadowy figures were moving around 
inside it, none of them clearly in focus. 

“Like my Dark Detectors, do you?” said Moody, who 
was watching Harry closely. 

“What’s that?” Harry asked, pointing at the squiggly 
golden aerial. 

“Secrecy Sensor. Vibrates when it detects 
concealment and lies ... no use here, of course, too 
much interference — students in every direction lying 
about why they haven’t done their homework. Been 
humming ever since I got here. I had to disable my 
Page | 378 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Sneakoscope because it wouldn’t stop whistling. It’s 
extra-sensitive, picks up stuff about a mile around. Of 
course, it could be picking up more than kid stuff,” he 
added in a growl. 

“And what’s the mirror for?” 

“Oh that’s my Foe-Glass. See them out there, 
skulking around? I’m not really in trouble until I see 
the whites of their eyes. That’s when I open my 
trunk.” 

He let out a short, harsh laugh, and pointed to the 
large trunk under the window. It had seven keyholes 
in a row. Harry wondered what was in there, until 
Moody’s next question brought him sharply back to 
earth. 

“So ... found out about the dragons, have you?” 

Harry hesitated. He’d been afraid of this — but he 
hadn’t told Cedric, and he certainly wasn’t going to 
tell Moody, that Hagrid had broken the rules. 

“It’s all right,” said Moody, sitting down and 
stretching out his wooden leg with a groan. 

“Cheating’s a traditional part of the Tri-wizard 
Tournament and always has been.” 

“I didn’t cheat,” said Harry sharply. “It was — a sort 
of accident that I found out.” 

Moody grinned. “I wasn’t accusing you, laddie. I’ve 
been telling Dumbledore from the start, he can be as 
high-minded as he likes, but you can bet old 
Karkaroff and Maxime won’t be. They’ll have told their 
champions everything they can. They want to win. 
They want to beat Dumbledore. They’d like to prove 
he’s only human.” 

Page | 379 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Moody gave another harsh laugh, and his magical eye 
swiveled around so fast it made Harry feel queasy to 
watch it. 

“So ... got any ideas how you’re going to get past your 
dragon yet?” said Moody. 

“No,” said Harry. 

“Well, I’m not going to tell you,” said Moody gruffly. “I 
don’t show favoritism, me. I’m just going to give you 
some good, general advice. And the first bit is — play 
to your strengths.” 

“I haven’t got any,” said Harry, before he could stop 
himself. 

“Excuse me,” growled Moody, “you’ve got strengths if I 
say you’ve got them. Think now. What are you best 
at?” 

Harry tried to concentrate. What was he best at? 

Well, that was easy, really — 

“Quidditch,” he said dully, “and a fat lot of help — ” 

“That’s right,” said Moody, staring at him very hard, 
his magical eye barely moving at all. “You’re a damn 
good flier from what I’ve heard.” 

“Yeah, but ...” Harry stared at him. “I’m not allowed a 
broom, I’ve only got my wand — ” 

“My second piece of general advice,” said Moody 
loudly, interrupting him, “is to use a nice, simple 
spell that will enable you to get what you need.” 

Harry looked at him blankly. What did he need? 



Page | 380 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Come on, boy ...” whispered Moody. “Put them 
together ... it’s not that difficult. ...” 

And it clicked. He was best at flying. He needed to 
pass the dragon in the air. For that, he needed his 
Firebolt. And for his Firebolt, he needed — 

“Hermione,” Harry whispered, when he had sped into 
greenhouse three minutes later, uttering a hurried 
apology to Professor Sprout as he passed her. 
“Hermione — I need you to help me.” 

“What d’you think I’ve been trying to do, Harry?” she 
whispered back, her eyes round with anxiety over the 
top of the quivering Flutterby Bush she was pruning. 

“Hermione, I need to learn how to do a Summoning 
Charm properly by tomorrow afternoon.” 

And so they practiced. They didn’t have lunch, but 
headed for a free classroom, where Harry tried with 
all his might to make various objects fly across the 
room toward him. He was still having problems. The 
books and quills kept losing heart halfway across the 
room and dropping like stones to the floor. 

“Concentrate, Harry, concentrate. ...” 

“What d’you think I’m trying to do?” said Harry 
angrily. “A great big dragon keeps popping up in my 
head for some reason. ... Okay, try again. ...” 

He wanted to skip Divination to keep practicing, but 
Hermione refused point-blank to skive off 
Arithmancy, and there was no point in staying 
without her. He therefore had to endure over an hour 
of Professor Trelawney, who spent half the lesson 
telling everyone that the position of Mars with relation 



Page | 381 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




to Saturn at that moment meant that people born in 
July were in great danger of sudden, violent deaths. 

“Well, that’s good,” said Harry loudly, his temper 
getting the better of him, “just as long as it’s not 
drawn-out. I don’t want to suffer.” 

Ron looked for a moment as though he was going to 
laugh; he certainly caught Harry’s eye for the first 
time in days, but Harry was still feeling too resentful 
toward Ron to care. He spent the rest of the lesson 
trying to attract small objects toward him under the 
table with his wand. He managed to make a fly zoom 
straight into his hand, though he wasn’t entirely sure 
that was his prowess at Summoning Charms — 
perhaps the fly was just stupid. 

He forced down some dinner after Divination, then 
returned to the empty classroom with Hermione, 
using the Invisibility Cloak to avoid the teachers. 

They kept practicing until past midnight. They would 
have stayed longer, but Peeves turned up and, 
pretending to think that Harry wanted things thrown 
at him, started chucking chairs across the room. 
Harry and Hermione left in a hurry before the noise 
attracted Filch, and went back to the Gryffindor 
common room, which was now mercifully empty. 

At two o’clock in the morning, Harry stood near the 
fireplace, surrounded by heaps of objects: books, 
quills, several upturned chairs, an old set of 
Gobstones, and Neville’s toad, Trevor. Only in the last 
hour had Harry really got the hang of the Summoning 
Charm. 

“That’s better, Harry, that’s loads better,” Hermione 
said, looking exhausted but very pleased. 



Page | 382 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, now we know what to do next time I can’t 
manage a spell,” Harry said, throwing a rune 
dictionary back to Hermione, so he could try again, 
“threaten me with a dragon. Right ...” He raised his 
wand once more. “Accio Dictionary !” 

The heavy book soared out of Hermione ’s hand, flew 
across the room, and Harry caught it. 

“Harry, I really think you’ve got it!” said Hermione 
delightedly. 

“Just as long as it works tomorrow,” Harry said. “The 
Firebolt’s going to be much farther away than the 
stuff in here, it’s going to be in the castle, and I’m 
going to be out there on the grounds. ...” 

“That doesn’t matter,” said Hermione firmly “Just as 
long as you’re concentrating really, really hard on it, 
it’ll come. Harry, we’d better get some sleep ... you’re 
going to need it.” 

Harry had been focusing so hard on learning the 
Summoning Charm that evening that some of his 
blind panic had left him. It returned in full measure, 
however, on the following morning. The atmosphere 
in the school was one of great tension and excitement. 
Lessons were to stop at midday, giving all the 
students time to get down to the dragons’ enclosure 
— though of course, they didn’t yet know what they 
would find there. 

Harry felt oddly separate from everyone around him, 
whether they were wishing him good luck or hissing 
“ We’ll have a box of tissues ready, Potted as he 
passed. It was a state of nervousness so advanced 
that he wondered whether he mightn’t just lose his 
head when they tried to lead him out to his dragon, 
and start trying to curse everyone in sight. Time was 
Page | 383 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




behaving in a more peculiar fashion than ever, 
rushing past in great dollops, so that one moment he 
seemed to be sitting down in his first lesson, History 
of Magic, and the next, walking into lunch . . . and 
then (where had the morning gone? the last of the 
dragon-free hours?), Professor McGonagall was 
hurrying over to him in the Great Hall. Lots of people 
were watching. 

“Potter, the champions have to come down onto the 
grounds now. ... You have to get ready for your first 
task.” 

“Okay,” said Harry, standing up, his fork falling onto 
his plate with a clatter. 

“Good luck, Harry,” Hermione whispered. “You’ll be 
fine!” 

“Yeah,” said Harry in a voice that was most unlike his 
own. 

He left the Great Hall with Professor McGonagall. She 
didn’t seem herself either; in fact, she looked nearly 
as anxious as Hermione. As she walked him down the 
stone steps and out into the cold November afternoon, 
she put her hand on his shoulder. 

“Now, don’t panic,” she said, “just keep a cool head. 

... We’ve got wizards standing by to control the 
situation if it gets out of hand. ... The main thing is 
just to do your best, and nobody will think any the 
worse of you. ... Are you all right?” 

“Yes,” Harry heard himself say. “Yes, I’m fine.” 

She was leading him toward the place where the 
dragons were, around the edge of the forest, but when 
they approached the clump of trees behind which the 

Page | 384 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




enclosure would be clearly visible, Harry saw that a 
tent had been erected, its entrance facing them, 
screening the dragons from view. 

“You’re to go in here with the other champions,” said 
Professor McGonagall, in a rather shaky sort of voice, 
“and wait for your turn, Potter. Mr. Bagman is in 
there ... he’ll be telling you the — the procedure. ... 
Good luck.” 

“Thanks,” said Harry, in a flat, distant voice. She left 
him at the entrance of the tent. Harry went inside. 

Fleur Delacour was sitting in a corner on a low 
wooden stool. She didn’t look nearly as composed as 
usual, but rather pale and clammy. Viktor Krum 
looked even surlier than usual, which Harry 
supposed was his way of showing nerves. Cedric was 
pacing up and down. When Harry entered, Cedric 
gave him a small smile, which Harry returned, feeling 
the muscles in his face working rather hard, as 
though they had forgotten how to do it. 

“Harry! Good-o!” said Bagman happily, looking 
around at him. “Come in, come in, make yourself at 
home!” 

Bagman looked somehow like a slightly overblown 
cartoon figure, standing amid all the pale-faced 
champions. He was wearing his old Wasp robes again. 

“Well, now we’re all here — time to fill you in!” said 
Bagman brightly. “When the audience has assembled, 
I’m going to be offering each of you this bag” — he 
held up a small sack of purple silk and shook it at 
them — “from which you will each select a small 
model of the thing you are about to face! There are 
different — er — varieties, you see. And I have to tell 



Page | 385 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




you something else too . . . ah, yes . . . your task is to 
collect the golden egg\” 

Harry glanced around. Cedric had nodded once, to 
show that he understood Bagman’s words, and then 
started pacing around the tent again; he looked 
slightly green. Fleur Delacour and Krum hadn’t 
reacted at all. Perhaps they thought they might be 
sick if they opened their mouths; that was certainly 
how Harry felt. But they, at least, had volunteered for 
this. ... 

And in no time at all, hundreds upon hundreds of 
pairs of feet could be heard passing the tent, their 
owners talking excitedly, laughing, joking. ... Harry 
felt as separate from the crowd as though they were a 
different species. And then — it seemed like about a 
second later to Harry — Bagman was opening the 
neck of the purple silk sack. 

“Ladies first,” he said, offering it to Fleur Delacour. 

She put a shaking hand inside the bag and drew out 
a tiny, perfect model of a dragon — a Welsh Green. It 
had the number two around its neck. And Harry 
knew, by the fact that Fleur showed no sign of 
surprise, but rather a determined resignation, that he 
had been right: Madame Maxime had told her what 
was coming. 

The same held true for Krum. He pulled out the 
scarlet Chinese Fireball. It had a number three 
around its neck. He didn’t even blink, just sat back 
down and stared at the ground. 

Cedric put his hand into the bag, and out came the 
blueish-gray Swedish Short-Snout, the number one 
tied around its neck. Knowing what was left, Harry 
put his hand into the silk bag and pulled out the 

Page | 386 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hungarian Horntail, and the number four. It 
stretched its wings as he looked down at it, and bared 
its minuscule fangs. 

“Well, there you are!” said Bagman. “You have each 
pulled out the dragon you will face, and the numbers 
refer to the order in which you are to take on the 
dragons, do you see? Now, I’m going to have to leave 
you in a moment, because I’m commentating. Mr. 
Diggory, you’re first, just go out into the enclosure 
when you hear a whistle, all right? Now ... Harry ... 
could I have a quick word? Outside?” 

“Er ... yes,” said Harry blankly, and he got up and 
went out of the tent with Bagman, who walked him a 
short distance away, into the trees, and then turned 
to him with a fatherly expression on his face. 

“Feeling all right, Harry? Anything I can get you?” 

“What?” said Harry. “I — no, nothing.” 

“Got a plan?” said Bagman, lowering his voice 
conspiratorially. “Because I don’t mind sharing a few 
pointers, if you’d like them, you know. I mean,” 
Bagman continued, lowering his voice still further, 
“you’re the underdog here, Harry. ... Anything I can 
do to help ...” 

“No,” said Harry so quickly he knew he had sounded 
rude, “no — I — I know what I’m going to do, thanks.” 

“Nobody would know, Harry,” said Bagman, winking 
at him. 

“No, I’m fine,” said Harry, wondering why he kept 
telling people this, and wondering whether he had 
ever been less fine. “I’ve got a plan worked out, I — ” 



Page | 387 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




A whistle had blown somewhere. 



“Good lord, I’ve got to run!” said Bagman in alarm, 
and he hurried off. 

Harry walked back to the tent and saw Cedric 
emerging from it, greener than ever. Harry tried to 
wish him luck as he walked past, but all that came 
out of his mouth was a sort of hoarse grunt. 

Harry went back inside to Fleur and Krum. Seconds 
later, they heard the roar of the crowd, which meant 
Cedric had entered the enclosure and was now face- 
to-face with the living counterpart of his model. ... 

It was worse than Harry could ever have imagined, 
sitting there and listening. The crowd screamed . . . 
yelled . . . gasped like a single many-headed entity, as 
Cedric did whatever he was doing to get past the 
Swedish Short-Snout. Krum was still staring at the 
ground. Fleur had now taken to retracing Cedric’s 
steps, around and around the tent. And Bagman’s 
commentary made everything much, much worse. ... 
Horrible pictures formed in Harry’s mind as he heard: 
“Oooh, narrow miss there, very narrow” ... “He’s 
taking risks, this one!” ... “Clever move — pity it 
didn’t work!” 

And then, after about fifteen minutes, Harry heard 
the deafening roar that could mean only one thing: 
Cedric had gotten past his dragon and captured the 
golden egg. 

“Very good indeed!” Bagman was shouting. “And now 
the marks from the judges!” 

But he didn’t shout out the marks; Harry supposed 
the judges were holding them up and showing them 
to the crowd. 

Page | 388 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“One down, three to go!” Bagman yelled as the whistle 
blew again. “Miss Delacour, if you please!” 



Fleur was trembling from head to foot; Harry felt more 
warmly toward her than he had done so far as she left 
the tent with her head held high and her hand 
clutching her wand. He and Krum were left alone, at 
opposite sides of the tent, avoiding each other’s gaze. 

The same process started again. ... “Oh I’m not sure 
that was wise!” they could hear Bagman shouting 
gleefully. “Oh . . . nearly! Careful now . . . good lord, I 
thought she’d had it then!” 

Ten minutes later, Harry heard the crowd erupt into 
applause once more. ... Fleur must have been 
successful too. A pause, while Fleur’s marks were 
being shown . . . more clapping . . . then, for the third 
time, the whistle. 

“And here comes Mr. Krum!” cried Bagman, and 
Krum slouched out, leaving Harry quite alone. 

He felt much more aware of his body than usual; very 
aware of the way his heart was pumping fast, and his 
fingers tingling with fear ... yet at the same time, he 
seemed to be outside himself, seeing the walls of the 
tent, and hearing the crowd, as though from far away. 



“Very daring!” Bagman was yelling, and Harry heard 
the Chinese Fireball emit a horrible, roaring shriek, 
while the crowd drew its collective breath. “That’s 
some nerve he’s showing — and — yes, he’s got the 
egg!” 

Applause shattered the wintery air like breaking 
glass; Krum had finished — it would be Harry’s turn 
any moment. 

Page | 389 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He stood up, noticing dimly that his legs seemed to be 
made of marshmallow. He waited. And then he heard 
the whistle blow. He walked out through the entrance 
of the tent, the panic rising into a crescendo inside 
him. And now he was walking past the trees, through 
a gap in the enclosure fence. 

He saw everything in front of him as though it was a 
very highly colored dream. There were hundreds and 
hundreds of faces staring down at him from stands 
that had been magicked there since he’d last stood on 
this spot. And there was the Horntail, at the other 
end of the enclosure, crouched low over her clutch of 
eggs, her wings half-furled, her evil, yellow eyes upon 
him, a monstrous, scaly, black lizard, thrashing her 
spiked tail, leaving yard-long gouge marks in the hard 
ground. The crowd was making a great deal of noise, 
but whether friendly or not, Harry didn’t know or 
care. It was time to do what he had to do ... to focus 
his mind, entirely and absolutely, upon the thing that 
was his only chance. ... 

He raised his wand. 

“Accio Firebolti” he shouted. 

Harry waited, every fiber of him hoping, praying. ... If 
it hadn’t worked ... if it wasn’t coming ... He seemed 
to be looking at everything around him through some 
sort of shimmering, transparent barrier, like a heat 
haze, which made the enclosure and the hundreds of 
faces around him swim strangely. ... 

And then he heard it, speeding through the air behind 
him; he turned and saw his Firebolt hurtling toward 
him around the edge of the woods, soaring into the 
enclosure, and stopping dead in midair beside him, 
waiting for him to mount. The crowd was making 
even more noise. ... Bagman was shouting something 
Page | 390 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




... but Harry’s ears were not working properly 
anymore ... listening wasn’t important. ... 

He swung his leg over the broom and kicked off from 
the ground. And a second later, something 
miraculous happened. ... 

As he soared upward, as the wind rushed through his 
hair, as the crowd’s faces became mere flesh-colored 
pinpricks below, and the Horntail shrank to the size 
of a dog, he realized that he had left not only the 
ground behind, but also his fear. . . . He was back 
where he belonged. ... 

This was just another Quidditch match, that was all 
... just another Quidditch match, and that Horntail 
was just another ugly opposing team. ... 

He looked down at the clutch of eggs and spotted the 
gold one, gleaming against its cement-colored fellows, 
residing safely between the dragon’s front legs. 
“Okay,” Harry told himself, “diversionary tactics ... 
let’s go. ...” 

He dived. The Horntail’s head followed him; he knew 
what it was going to do and pulled out of the dive just 
in time; a jet of fire had been released exactly where 
he would have been had he not swerved away . . . but 
Harry didn’t care ... that was no more than dodging a 
Bludger. ... 

“Great Scott, he can fly!” yelled Bagman as the crowd 
shrieked and gasped. “Are you watching this, Mr. 
Krum?” 

Harry soared higher in a circle; the Horntail was still 
following his progress; its head revolving on its long 
neck — if he kept this up, it would be nicely dizzy — 



Page | 391 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




but better not push it too long, or it would be 
breathing fire again — 

Harry plummeted just as the Horntail opened its 
mouth, but this time he was less lucky — he missed 
the flames, but the tail came whipping up to meet 
him instead, and as he swerved to the left, one of the 
long spikes grazed his shoulder, ripping his robes — 

He could feel it stinging, he could hear screaming and 
groans from the crowd, but the cut didn’t seem to be 
deep. ... Now he zoomed around the back of the 
Horntail, and a possibility occurred to him. ... 

The Horntail didn’t seem to want to take off, she was 
too protective of her eggs. Though she writhed and 
twisted, furling and unfurling her wings and keeping 
those fearsome yellow eyes on Harry, she was afraid 
to move too far from them . . . but he had to persuade 
her to do it, or he’d never get near them. ... The trick 
was to do it carefully, gradually. . . . 

He began to fly, first this way, then the other, not 
near enough to make her breathe fire to stave him off, 
but still posing a sufficient threat to ensure she kept 
her eyes on him. Her head swayed this way and that, 
watching him out of those vertical pupils, her fangs 
bared. ... 

He flew higher. The Horntail’s head rose with him, her 
neck now stretched to its fullest extent, still swaying, 
like a snake before its charmer. . . . 

Harry rose a few more feet, and she let out a roar of 
exasperation. He was like a fly to her, a fly she was 
longing to swat; her tail thrashed again, but he was 
too high to reach now. ... She shot fire into the air, 
which he dodged. ... Her jaws opened wide. ... 



Page | 392 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Come on,” Harry hissed, swerving tantalizingly above 
her, “come on, come and get me ... up you get now ...” 

And then she reared, spreading her great, black, 
leathery wings at last, as wide as those of a small 
airplane — and Harry dived. Before the dragon knew 
what he had done, or where he had disappeared to, 
he was speeding toward the ground as fast as he 
could go, toward the eggs now unprotected by her 
clawed front legs — he had taken his hands off his 
Firebolt — he had seized the golden egg — 

And with a huge spurt of speed, he was off, he was 
soaring out over the stands, the heavy egg safely 
under his uninjured arm, and it was as though 
somebody had just turned the volume back up — for 
the first time, he became properly aware of the noise 
of the crowd, which was screaming and applauding as 
loudly as the Irish supporters at the World Cup — 

“Look at that!” Bagman was yelling. “Will you look at 
that! Our youngest champion is quickest to get his 
egg! Well, this is going to shorten the odds on Mr. 
Potter!” 

Harry saw the dragon keepers rushing forward to 
subdue the Horntail, and, over at the entrance to the 
enclosure, Professor McGonagall, Professor Moody, 
and Hagrid hurrying to meet him, all of them waving 
him toward them, their smiles evident even from this 
distance. He flew back over the stands, the noise of 
the crowd pounding his eardrums, and came in 
smoothly to land, his heart lighter than it had been in 
weeks. ... He had got through the first task, he had 
survived. ... 

“That was excellent, Potter!” cried Professor 
McGonagall as he got off the Firebolt — which from 
her was extravagant praise. He noticed that her hand 

Page | 393 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




shook as she pointed at his shoulder. “You’ll need to 
see Madam Pomfrey before the judges give out your 
score. ... Over there, she’s had to mop up Diggory 
already. ...” 

“Yeh did it, Harry!” said Hagrid hoarsely. “Yeh did it! 
An’ agains’ the Horntail an’ all, an’ yeh know Charlie 
said that was the wors’ — ” 

“Thanks, Hagrid,” said Harry loudly, so that Hagrid 
wouldn’t blunder on and reveal that he had shown 
Harry the dragons beforehand. 

Professor Moody looked very pleased too; his magical 
eye was dancing in its socket. 

“Nice and easy does the trick, Potter,” he growled. 

“Right then, Potter, the first aid tent, please ...” said 
Professor McGonagall. 

Harry walked out of the enclosure, still panting, and 
saw Madam Pomfrey standing at the mouth of a 
second tent, looking worried. 

“Dragons!” she said, in a disgusted tone, pulling 
Harry inside. The tent was divided into cubicles; he 
could make out Cedric’s shadow through the canvas, 
but Cedric didn’t seem to be badly injured; he was 
sitting up, at least. Madam Pomfrey examined Harry’s 
shoulder, talking furiously all the while. “Last year 
dementors, this year dragons, what are they going to 
bring into this school next? You’re very lucky ... this 
is quite shallow ... it’ll need cleaning before I heal it 
up, though. ...” 

She cleaned the cut with a dab of some purple liquid 
that smoked and stung, but then poked his shoulder 
with her wand, and he felt it heal instantly. 

Page | 394 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Now, just sit quietly for a minute — sit! And then you 
can go and get your score.” 

She bustled out of the tent and he heard her go next 
door and say, “How does it feel now, Diggory?” 

Harry didn’t want to sit still: He was too full of 
adrenaline. He got to his feet, wanting to see what 
was going on outside, but before he’d reached the 
mouth of the tent, two people had come darting inside 
— Hermione, followed closely by Ron. 

“Harry, you were brilliant!” Hermione said squeakily. 
There were fingernail marks on her face where she 
had been clutching it in fear. “You were amazing! You 
really were!” 

But Harry was looking at Ron, who was very white 
and staring at Harry as though he were a ghost. 

“Harry,” he said, very seriously, “whoever put your 
name in that goblet — I — I reckon they’re trying to 
do you in!” 

It was as though the last few weeks had never 
happened — as though Harry were meeting Ron for 
the first time, right after he’d been made champion. 

“Caught on, have you?” said Harry coldly. “Took you 
long enough.” 

Hermione stood nervously between them, looking 
from one to the other. Ron opened his mouth 
uncertainly. Harry knew Ron was about to apologize 
and suddenly he found he didn’t need to hear it. 

“It’s okay,” he said, before Ron could get the words 
out. “Forget it.” 



Page | 395 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“No,” said Ron, “I shouldn’t’ve — ” 



“ Forget it,” Harry said. 

Ron grinned nervously at him, and Harry grinned 
back. 

Hermione burst into tears. 

“There’s nothing to cry about!” Harry told her, 
bewildered. 

“You two are so stupid).” she shouted, stamping her 
foot on the ground, tears splashing down her front. 
Then, before either of them could stop her, she had 
given both of them a hug and dashed away, now 
positively howling. 

“Barking mad,” said Ron, shaking his head. “Harry, 
c’mon, they’ll be putting up your scores. ...” 

Picking up the golden egg and his Firebolt, feeling 
more elated than he would have believed possible an 
hour ago, Harry ducked out of the tent, Ron by his 
side, talking fast. 

“You were the best, you know, no competition. Cedric 
did this weird thing where he Transfigured a rock on 
the ground . . . turned it into a dog ... he was trying to 
make the dragon go for the dog instead of him. Well, 
it was a pretty cool bit of Transfiguration, and it sort 
of worked, because he did get the egg, but he got 
burned as well — the dragon changed its mind 
halfway through and decided it would rather have 
him than the Labrador; he only just got away. And 
that Fleur girl tried this sort of charm, I think she 
was trying to put it into a trance — well, that kind of 
worked too, it went all sleepy, but then it snored, and 
this great jet of flame shot out, and her skirt caught 
Page | 396 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




fire — she put it out with a bit of water out of her 
wand. And Krum — you won’t believe this, but he 
didn’t even think of flying! He was probably the best 
after you, though. Hit it with some sort of spell right 
in the eye. Only thing is, it went trampling around in 
agony and squashed half the real eggs — they took 
marks off for that, he wasn’t supposed to do any 
damage to them.” 

Ron drew breath as he and Harry reached the edge of 
the enclosure. Now that the Horntail had been taken 
away, Harry could see where the five judges were 
sitting — right at the other end, in raised seats 
draped in gold. 

“It’s marks out of ten from each one,” Ron said, and 
Harry, squinting up the field, saw the first judge — 
Madame Maxime — raise her wand in the air. What 
looked like a long silver ribbon shot out of it, which 
twisted itself into a large figure eight. 

“Not bad!” said Ron as the crowd applauded. “I 
suppose she took marks off for your shoulder. ...” 

Mr. Crouch came next. He shot a number nine into 
the air. 

“Looking good!” Ron yelled, thumping Harry on the 
back. 

Next, Dumbledore. He too put up a nine. The crowd 
was cheering harder than ever. 

Ludo Bagman — ten. 

“Ten?” said Harry in disbelief. “But ... I got hurt. ... 
What’s he playing at?” 

“Harry, don’t complain!” Ron yelled excitedly. 

Page | 397 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




And now Karkaroff raised his wand. He paused for a 
moment, and then a number shot out of his wand too 
— four. 



“What?” Ron bellowed furiously. “Four? You lousy, 
biased scumbag, you gave Krum ten!” 

But Harry didn’t care, he wouldn’t have cared if 
Karkaroff had given him zero; Ron’s indignation on 
his behalf was worth about a hundred points to him. 
He didn’t tell Ron this, of course, but his heart felt 
lighter than air as he turned to leave the enclosure. 
And it wasn’t just Ron ... those weren’t only 
Gryffindors cheering in the crowd. When it had come 
to it, when they had seen what he was facing, most of 
the school had been on his side as well as Cedric’s. ... 
He didn’t care about the Slytherins, he could stand 
whatever they threw at him now. 

“You’re tied in first place, Harry! You and Krum!” said 
Charlie Weasley, hurrying to meet them as they set off 
back toward the school. “Listen, I’ve got to run, I’ve 
got to go and send Mum an owl, I swore I’d tell her 
what happened — but that was unbelievable! Oh yeah 
— and they told me to tell you you’ve got to hang 
around for a few more minutes. ... Bagman wants a 
word, back in the champions’ tent.” 

Ron said he would wait, so Harry reentered the tent, 
which somehow looked quite different now: friendly 
and welcoming. He thought back to how he’d felt 
while dodging the Horntail, and compared it to the 
long wait before he’d walked out to face it. ... There 
was no comparison; the wait had been immeasurably 
worse. 

Fleur, Cedric, and Krum all came in together. One 
side of Cedric’s face was covered in a thick orange 



Page | 398 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




paste, which was presumably mending his burn. He 
grinned at Harry when he saw him. 

“Good one, Harry.” 

“And you,” said Harry, grinning back. 

“Well done, all of you!” said Ludo Bagman, bouncing 
into the tent and looking as pleased as though he 
personally had just got past a dragon. “Now, just a 
quick few words. You’ve got a nice long break before 
the second task, which will take place at half past 
nine on the morning of February the twenty-fourth — 
but we’re giving you something to think about in the 
meantime! If you look down at those golden eggs 
you’re all holding, you will see that they open ... see 
the hinges there? You need to solve the clue inside 
the egg — because it will tell you what the second 
task is, and enable you to prepare for it! All clear? 
Sure? Well, off you go, then!” 

Harry left the tent, rejoined Ron, and they started to 
walk back around the edge of the forest, talking hard; 
Harry wanted to hear what the other champions had 
done in more detail. Then, as they rounded the clump 
of trees behind which Harry had first heard the 
dragons roar, a witch leapt out from behind them. 

It was Rita Skeeter. She was wearing acid-green robes 
today; the Quick-Quotes Quill in her hand blended 
perfectly against them. 

“Congratulations, Harry!” she said, beaming at him. “I 
wonder if you could give me a quick word? How you 
felt facing that dragon? How you feel now, about the 
fairness of the scoring?” 

“Yeah, you can have a word,” said Harry savagely. 
“Good-bye.” 

Page | 399 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




And he set off back to the castle with Ron. 



Page | 400 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE HOUSE-ELF LIBERATION FRONT 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione went up to the Owlery that 
evening to find Pigwidgeon, so that Harry could send 
Sirius a letter telling him that he had managed to get 
past his dragon unscathed. On the way, Harry filled 
Ron in on everything Sirius had told him about 
Karkaroff. Though shocked at first to hear that 
Karkaroff had been a Death Eater, by the time they 
entered the Owlery Ron was saying that they ought to 
have suspected it all along. 

“Fits, doesn’t it?” he said. “Remember what Malfoy 
said on the train, about his dad being friends with 
Karkaroff? Now we know where they knew each other. 
They were probably running around in masks 
together at the World Cup. ... I’ll tell you one thing, 
though, Harry, if it was Karkaroff who put your name 
in the goblet, he’s going to be feeling really stupid 
now, isn’t he? Didn’t work, did it? You only got a 
scratch! Come here — I’ll do it — ” 

Pigwidgeon was so overexcited at the idea of a delivery 
he was flying around and around Harry’s head, 

Page | 401 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 



hooting incessantly. Ron snatched Pigwidgeon out of 
the air and held him still while Harry attached the 
letter to his leg. 

“There’s no way any of the other tasks are going to be 
that dangerous, how could they be?” Ron went on as 
he carried Pigwidgeon to the window. “You know 
what? I reckon you could win this tournament, Harry, 
I’m serious.” 

Harry knew that Ron was only saying this to make up 
for his behavior of the last few weeks, but he 
appreciated it all the same. Hermione, however, 
leaned against the Owlery wall, folded her arms, and 
frowned at Ron. 

“Harry’s got a long way to go before he finishes this 
tournament,” she said seriously. “If that was the first 
task, I hate to think what’s coming next.” 

“Right little ray of sunshine, aren’t you?” said Ron. 
“You and Professor Trelawney should get together 
sometime.” 

He threw Pigwidgeon out of the window. Pigwidgeon 
plummeted twelve feet before managing to pull 
himself back up again; the letter attached to his leg 
was much longer and heavier than usual — Harry 
hadn’t been able to resist giving Sirius a blow-by-blow 
account of exactly how he had swerved, circled, and 
dodged the Horntail. They watched Pigwidgeon 
disappear into the darkness, and then Ron said, 

“Well, we’d better get downstairs for your surprise 
party, Harry — Fred and George should have nicked 
enough food from the kitchens by now.” 

Sure enough, when they entered the Gryffindor 
common room it exploded with cheers and yells again. 
There were mountains of cakes and flagons of 

Page | 402 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




pumpkin juice and butterbeer on every surface; Lee 
Jordan had let off some Filibuster’s Fireworks, so that 
the air was thick with stars and sparks; and Dean 
Thomas, who was very good at drawing, had put up 
some impressive new banners, most of which depicted 
Harry zooming around the Horntail’s head on his 
Firebolt, though a couple showed Cedric with his 
head on fire. 

Harry helped himself to food; he had almost forgotten 
what it was like to feel properly hungry, and sat down 
with Ron and Hermione. He couldn’t believe how 
happy he felt; he had Ron back on his side, he’d 
gotten through the first task, and he wouldn’t have to 
face the second one for three months. 

“Blimey, this is heavy,” said Lee Jordan, picking up 
the golden egg, which Harry had left on a table, and 
weighing it in his hands. “Open it, Harry, go on! Let’s 
just see what’s inside it!” 

“He’s supposed to work out the clue on his own,” 
Hermione said swiftly. “It’s in the tournament rules. 



“I was supposed to work out how to get past the 
dragon on my own too,” Harry muttered, so only 
Hermione could hear him, and she grinned rather 
guiltily. 

“Yeah, go on, Harry, open it!” several people echoed. 

Lee passed Harry the egg, and Harry dug his 
fingernails into the groove that ran all the way around 
it and prised it open. 

It was hollow and completely empty — but the 
moment Harry opened it, the most horrible noise, a 
loud and screechy wailing, filled the room. The 

Page | 403 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




nearest thing to it Harry had ever heard was the ghost 
orchestra at Nearly Headless Nick’s deathday party, 
who had all been playing the musical saw. 

“Shut it!” Fred bellowed, his hands over his ears. 

“What was that?” said Seamus Finnigan, staring at 
the egg as Harry slammed it shut again. “Sounded 
like a banshee. ... Maybe you’ve got to get past one of 
those next, Harry!” 

“It was someone being tortured!” said Neville, who 
had gone very white and spilled sausage rolls all over 
the floor. “You’re going to have to fight the Cruciatus 
Curse!” 

“Don’t be a prat, Neville, that’s illegal,” said George. 
“They wouldn’t use the Cruciatus Curse on the 
champions. I thought it sounded a bit like Percy 
singing ... maybe you’ve got to attack him while he’s 
in the shower, Harry.” 

“Want a jam tart, Hermione?” said Fred. 

Hermione looked doubtfully at the plate he was 
offering her. Fred grinned. 

“It’s all right,” he said. “I haven’t done anything to 
them. It’s the custard creams you’ve got to watch — ” 

Neville, who had just bitten into a custard cream, 
choked and spat it out. Fred laughed. 

“Just my little joke, Neville. ...” 

Hermione took a jam tart. Then she said, “Did you get 
all this from the kitchens, Fred?” 



Page | 404 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yep,” said Fred, grinning at her. He put on a high- 
pitched squeak and imitated a house-elf. “ ‘Anything 
we can get you, sir, anything at all!’ They’re dead 
helpful ... get me a roast ox if I said I was peckish.” 

“How do you get in there?” Hermione said in an 
innocently casual sort of voice. 

“Easy,” said Fred, “concealed door behind a painting 
of a bowl of fruit. Just tickle the pear, and it giggles 
and — ” He stopped and looked suspiciously at her. 
“Why?” 

“Nothing,” said Hermione quickly. 

“Going to try and lead the house-elves out on strike 
now, are you?” said George. “Going to give up all the 
leaflet stuff and try and stir them up into rebellion?” 

Several people chortled. Hermione didn’t answer. 

“Don’t you go upsetting them and telling them they’ve 
got to take clothes and salaries!” said Fred warningly. 
“You’ll put them off their cooking!” 

Just then, Neville caused a slight diversion by turning 
into a large canary. 

“Oh — sorry, Neville!” Fred shouted over all the 
laughter. “I forgot — it was the custard creams we 
hexed — ” 

Within a minute, however, Neville had molted, and 
once his feathers had fallen off, he reappeared looking 
entirely normal. He even joined in laughing. 

“Canary Creams!” Fred shouted to the excitable 
crowd. “George and I invented them — seven Sickles 
each, a bargain!” 

Page | 405 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




It was nearly one in the morning when Harry finally 
went up to the dormitory with Ron, Neville, Seamus, 
and Dean. Before he pulled the curtains of his four- 
poster shut, Harry set his tiny model of the 
Hungarian Horntail on the table next to his bed, 
where it yawned, curled up, and closed its eyes. 

Really, Harry thought, as he pulled the hangings on 
his four-poster closed, Hagrid had a point . . . they 
were all right, really, dragons. ... 

The start of December brought wind and sleet to 
Hogwarts. Drafty though the castle always was in 
winter, Harry was glad of its fires and thick walls 
every time he passed the Durmstrang ship on the 
lake, which was pitching in the high winds, its black 
sails billowing against the dark skies. He thought the 
Beauxbatons caravan was likely to be pretty chilly 
too. Hagrid, he noticed, was keeping Madame 
Maxime’s horses well provided with their preferred 
drink of single-malt whiskey; the fumes wafting from 
the trough in the corner of their paddock was enough 
to make the entire Care of Magical Creatures class 
light-headed. This was unhelpful, as they were still 
tending the horrible skrewts and needed their wits 
about them. 

“I’m not sure whether they hibernate or not,” Hagrid 
told the shivering class in the windy pumpkin patch 
next lesson. “Thought we’d jus’ try an’ see if they 
fancied a kip ... we’ll jus’ settle ’em down in these 
boxes. ...” 

There were now only ten skrewts left; apparently their 
desire to kill one another had not been exercised out 
of them. Each of them was now approaching six feet 
in length. Their thick gray armor; their powerful, 
scuttling legs; their fire-blasting ends; their stings 
and their suckers, combined to make the skrewts the 
most repulsive things Harry had ever seen. The class 
Page | 406 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




looked dispiritedly at the enormous boxes Hagrid had 
brought out, all lined with pillows and fluffy blankets. 

“Well jus’ lead ’em in here,” Hagrid said, “an’ put the 
lids on, and we’ll see what happens.” 

But the skrewts, it transpired, did not hibernate, and 
did not appreciate being forced into pillow-lined boxes 
and nailed in. Hagrid was soon yelling, “Don’ panic, 
now, don’ panic!” while the skrewts rampaged around 
the pumpkin patch, now strewn with the smoldering 
wreckage of the boxes. Most of the class — Malfoy, 
Crabbe, and Goyle in the lead — had fled into 
Hagrid ’s cabin through the back door and barricaded 
themselves in; Harry, Ron, and Hermione, however, 
were among those who remained outside trying to 
help Hagrid. Together they managed to restrain and 
tie up nine of the skrewts, though at the cost of 
numerous burns and cuts; finally, only one skrewt 
was left. 

“Don’ frighten him, now!” Hagrid shouted as Ron and 
Harry used their wands to shoot jets of fiery sparks at 
the skrewt, which was advancing menacingly on 
them, its sting arched, quivering, over its back. “Jus’ 
try an’ slip the rope ’round his sting, so he won’ hurt 
any o’ the others!” 

“Yeah, we wouldn’t want that!” Ron shouted angrily 
as he and Harry backed into the wall of Hagrid ’s 
cabin, still holding the skrewt off with their sparks. 

“Well, well, well ... this does look like fun.” 

Rita Skeeter was leaning on Hagrid ’s garden fence, 
looking in at the mayhem. She was wearing a thick 
magenta cloak with a furry purple collar today, and 
her crocodile-skin handbag was over her arm. 



Page | 407 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid launched himself forward on top of the skrewt 
that was cornering Harry and Ron and flattened it; a 
blast of fire shot out of its end, withering the 
pumpkin plants nearby. 

“Who ’re you?” Hagrid asked Rita Skeeter as he 
slipped a loop of rope around the skrewt’s sting and 
tightened it. 

“Rita Skeeter, Daily Prophet reporter,” Rita replied, 
beaming at him. Her gold teeth glinted. 

“Thought Dumbledore said you weren’ allowed inside 
the school anymore,” said Hagrid, frowning slightly as 
he got off the slightly squashed skrewt and started 
tugging it over to its fellows. 

Rita acted as though she hadn’t heard what Hagrid 
had said. 

“What are these fascinating creatures called?” she 
asked, beaming still more widely. 

“Blast-Ended Skrewts,” grunted Hagrid. 

“Really?” said Rita, apparently full of lively interest. 
“I’ve never heard of them before ... where do they 
come from?” 

Harry noticed a dull red flush rising up out of 
Hagrid’s wild black beard, and his heart sank. Where 
had Hagrid got the skrewts from? Hermione, who 
seemed to be thinking along these lines, said quickly, 
“They’re very interesting, aren’t they? Aren’t they, 
Harry?” 

“What? Oh yeah ... ouch ... interesting,” said Harry as 
she stepped on his foot. 



Page | 408 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Ah, you’re here, Harry!” said Rita Skeeter as she 
looked around. “So you like Care of Magical 
Creatures, do you? One of your favorite lessons?” 

“Yes,” said Harry stoutly. Hagrid beamed at him. 

“Lovely,” said Rita. “Really lovely. Been teaching 
long?” she added to Hagrid. 

Harry noticed her eyes travel over Dean (who had a 
nasty cut across one cheek), Lavender (whose robes 
were badly singed), Seamus (who was nursing several 
burnt fingers), and then to the cabin windows, where 
most of the class stood, their noses pressed against 
the glass waiting to see if the coast was clear. 

“This is o’ny me second year,” said Hagrid. 

“Lovely... I don’t suppose you’d like to give an 
interview, would you? Share some of your experience 
of magical creatures? The Prophet does a zoological 
column every Wednesday, as I’m sure you know. We 
could feature these — er — Bang-Ended Scoots.” 

“Blast-Ended Skrewts,” Hagrid said eagerly. “Er — 
yeah, why not?” 

Harry had a very bad feeling about this, but there was 
no way of communicating it to Hagrid without Rita 
Skeeter seeing, so he had to stand and watch in 
silence as Hagrid and Rita Skeeter made 
arrangements to meet in the Three Broomsticks for a 
good long interview later that week. Then the bell 
rang up at the castle, signaling the end of the lesson. 

“Well, good-bye, Harry!” Rita Skeeter called merrily to 
him as he set off with Ron and Hermione. “Until 
Friday night, then, Hagrid!” 



Page | 409 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Shell twist everything he says,” Harry said under his 
breath. 

“Just as long as he didn’t import those skrewts 
illegally or anything,” said Hermione desperately. 

They looked at one another — it was exactly the sort 
of thing Hagrid might do. 

“Hagrid’s been in loads of trouble before, and 
Dumbledore’s never sacked him,” said Ron 
consolingly. “Worst that can happen is Hagrid’ll have 
to get rid of the skrewts. Sorry ... did I say worst? I 
meant best.” 

Harry and Hermione laughed, and, feeling slightly 
more cheerful, went off to lunch. 

Harry thoroughly enjoyed double Divination that 
afternoon; they were still doing star charts and 
predictions, but now that he and Ron were friends 
once more, the whole thing seemed very funny again. 
Professor Trelawney, who had been so pleased with 
the pair of them when they had been predicting their 
own horrific deaths, quickly became irritated as they 
sniggered through her explanation of the various 
ways in which Pluto could disrupt everyday life. 

“I would think,” she said, in a mystical whisper that 
did not conceal her obvious annoyance, “that some of 
us” — she stared very meaningfully at Harry — 

“might be a little less frivolous had they seen what I 
have seen during my crystal gazing last night. As I sat 
here, absorbed in my needlework, the urge to consult 
the orb overpowered me. I arose, I settled myself 
before it, and I gazed into its crystalline depths . . . and 
what do you think I saw gazing back at me?” 

“An ugly old bat in outsize specs?” Ron muttered 
under his breath. 

Page | 410 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




Harry fought hard to keep his face straight. 

“Death, my dears.” 

Parvati and Lavender both put their hands over their 
mouths, looking horrified. 

“Yes,” said Professor Trelawney, nodding impressively, 
“it comes, ever closer, it circles overhead like a 
vulture, ever lower ... ever lower over the castle. ...” 

She stared pointedly at Harry, who yawned very 
widely and obviously. 

“It’d be a bit more impressive if she hadn’t done it 
about eighty times before,” Harry said as they finally 
regained the fresh air of the staircase beneath 
Professor Trelawney’s room. “But if I’d dropped dead 
every time she’s told me I’m going to, I’d be a medical 
miracle.” 

“You’d be a sort of extra-concentrated ghost,” said 
Ron, chortling, as they passed the Bloody Baron going 
in the opposite direction, his wide eyes staring 
sinisterly. “At least we didn’t get homework. I hope 
Hermione got loads off Professor Vector, I love not 
working when she is. ...” 

But Hermione wasn’t at dinner, nor was she in the 
library when they went to look for her afterward. The 
only person in there was Viktor Krum. Ron hovered 
behind the bookshelves for a while, watching Krum, 
debating in whispers with Harry whether he should 
ask for an autograph — but then Ron realized that six 
or seven girls were lurking in the next row of books, 
debating exactly the same thing, and he lost his 
enthusiasm for the idea. 



Page | 411 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Wonder where she’s got to?” Ron said as he and 
Harry went back to Gryffindor Tower. 



“Dunno ... balderdash.” 

But the Fat Lady had barely begun to swing forward 
when the sound of racing feet behind them 
announced Hermione’s arrival. 

“Harry!” she panted, skidding to a halt beside him 
(the Fat Lady stared down at her, eyebrows raised). 
“Harry, you’ve got to come — you’ve got to come, the 
most amazing thing’s happened — please — ” 

She seized Harry’s arm and started to try to drag him 
back along the corridor. 

“What’s the matter?” Harry said. 

“I’ll show you when we get there — oh come on, quick 



Harry looked around at Ron; he looked back at Harry, 
intrigued. 

“Okay,” Harry said, starting off back down the 
corridor with Hermione, Ron hurrying to keep up. 

“Oh don’t mind me!” the Fat Lady called irritably after 
them. “Don’t apologize for bothering me! I’ll just hang 
here, wide open, until you get back, shall I?” 

“Yeah, thanks!” Ron shouted over his shoulder. 

“Hermione, where are we going?” Harry asked, after 
she had led them down through six floors, and 
started down the marble staircase into the entrance 
hall. 



Page | 412 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You’ll see, you’ll see in a minute!” said Hermione 
excitedly. 

She turned left at the bottom of the staircase and 
hurried toward the door through which Cedric 
Diggory had gone the night after the Goblet of Fire 
had regurgitated his and Harry’s names. Harry had 
never been through here before. He and Ron followed 
Hermione down a flight of stone steps, but instead of 
ending up in a gloomy underground passage like the 
one that led to Snape’s dungeon, they found 
themselves in a broad stone corridor, brightly lit with 
torches, and decorated with cheerful paintings that 
were mainly of food. 

“Oh hang on ...” said Harry slowly, halfway down the 
corridor. “Wait a minute, Hermione. ...” 

“What?” She turned around to look at him, 
anticipation all over her face. 

“I know what this is about,” said Harry. 

He nudged Ron and pointed to the painting just 
behind Hermione. It showed a gigantic silver fruit 
bowl. 

“Hermione!” said Ron, cottoning on. “You’re trying to 
rope us into that spew stuff again!” 

“No, no, I’m not!” she said hastily. “And it’s not spew, 
Ron — ” 

“Changed the name, have you?” said Ron, frowning at 
her. “What are we now, then, the House-Elf Liberation 
Front? I’m not barging into that kitchen and trying to 
make them stop work, I’m not doing it — ” 



Page | 413 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




‘Tm not asking you to!” Hermione said impatiently. “I 
came down here just now, to talk to them all, and I 
found — oh come on, Harry, I want to show you!” 

She seized his arm again, pulled him in front of the 
picture of the giant fruit bowl, stretched out her 
forefinger, and tickled the huge green pear. It began 
to squirm, chuckling, and suddenly turned into a 
large green door handle. Hermione seized it, pulled 
the door open, and pushed Harry hard in the back, 
forcing him inside. 

He had one brief glimpse of an enormous, high- 
ceilinged room, large as the Great Hall above it, with 
mounds of glittering brass pots and pans heaped 
around the stone walls, and a great brick fireplace at 
the other end, when something small hurtled toward 
him from the middle of the room, squealing, “Harry 
Potter, sir! Harry Potteri” 

Next second all the wind had been knocked out of 
him as the squealing elf hit him hard in the midriff, 
hugging him so tightly he thought his ribs would 
break. 

“D-Dobby?” Harry gasped. 

“It is Dobby, sir, it is!” squealed the voice from 
somewhere around his navel. “Dobby has been 
hoping and hoping to see Harry Potter, sir, and Harry 
Potter has come to see him, sir!” 

Dobby let go and stepped back a few paces, beaming 
up at Harry, his enormous, green, tennis-ball-shaped 
eyes brimming with tears of happiness. He looked 
almost exactly as Harry remembered him; the pencil- 
shaped nose, the batlike ears, the long fingers and 
feet — all except the clothes, which were very 
different. 

Page | 414 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




When Dobby had worked for the Malfoys, he had 
always worn the same filthy old pillowcase. Now, 
however, he was wearing the strangest assortment of 
garments Harry had ever seen; he had done an even 
worse job of dressing himself than the wizards at the 
World Cup. He was wearing a tea cozy for a hat, on 
which he had pinned a number of bright badges; a tie 
patterned with horseshoes over a bare chest, a pair of 
what looked like children’s soccer shorts, and odd 
socks. One of these, Harry saw, was the black one 
Harry had removed from his own foot and tricked Mr. 
Malfoy into giving Dobby, thereby setting Dobby free. 
The other was covered in pink and orange stripes. 

“Dobby, what’re you doing here?” Harry said in 
amazement. 

“Dobby has come to work at Hogwarts, sir!” Dobby 
squealed excitedly. “Professor Dumbledore gave 
Dobby and Winky jobs, sir!” 

“Winky?” said Harry. “She’s here too?” 

“Yes, sir, yes!” said Dobby, and he seized Harry’s 
hand and pulled him off into the kitchen between the 
four long wooden tables that stood there. Each of 
these tables, Harry noticed as he passed them, was 
positioned exactly beneath the four House tables 
above, in the Great Hall. At the moment, they were 
clear of food, dinner having finished, but he supposed 
that an hour ago they had been laden with dishes 
that were then sent up through the ceiling to their 
counterparts above. 

At least a hundred little elves were standing around 
the kitchen, beaming, bowing, and curtsying as 
Dobby led Harry past them. They were all wearing the 
same uniform: a tea towel stamped with the Hogwarts 
crest, and tied, as Winky’s had been, like a toga. 

Page | 415 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dobby stopped in front of the brick fireplace and 
pointed. 

“Winky, sir!” he said. 

Winky was sitting on a stool by the fire. Unlike 
Dobby, she had obviously not foraged for clothes. She 
was wearing a neat little skirt and blouse with a 
matching blue hat, which had holes in it for her large 
ears. However, while every one of Dobby ’s strange 
collection of garments was so clean and well cared for 
that it looked brand-new, Winky was plainly not 
taking care of her clothes at all. There were soup 
stains all down her blouse and a burn in her skirt. 

“Hello, Winky,” said Harry. 

Winky’s lip quivered. Then she burst into tears, which 
spilled out of her great brown eyes and splashed 
down her front, just as they had done at the 
Quidditch World Cup. 

“Oh dear,” said Hermione. She and Ron had followed 
Harry and Dobby to the end of the kitchen. “Winky, 
don’t cry, please don’t ...” 

But Winky cried harder than ever. Dobby, on the 
other hand, beamed up at Harry. 

“Would Harry Potter like a cup of tea?” he squeaked 
loudly, over Winky’s sobs. 

“Er — yeah, okay,” said Harry. 

Instantly, about six house-elves came trotting up 
behind him, bearing a large silver tray laden with a 
teapot, cups for Harry, Ron, and Hermione, a milk 
jug, and a large plate of biscuits. 



Page | 416 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Good service!” Ron said, in an impressed voice. 
Hermione frowned at him, but the elves all looked 
delighted; they bowed very low and retreated. 

“How long have you been here, Dobby?” Harry asked 
as Dobby handed around the tea. 

“Only a week, Harry Potter, sir!” said Dobby happily. 
“Dobby came to see Professor Dumbledore, sir. You 
see, sir, it is very difficult for a house-elf who has 
been dismissed to get a new position, sir, very difficult 
indeed — ” 

At this, Winky howled even harder, her squashed- 
tomato of a nose dribbling all down her front, though 
she made no effort to stem the flow. 

“Dobby has traveled the country for two whole years, 
sir, trying to find work!” Dobby squeaked. “But Dobby 
hasn’t found work, sir, because Dobby wants paying 
now!” 

The house-elves all around the kitchen, who had been 
listening and watching with interest, all looked away 
at these words, as though Dobby had said something 
rude and embarrassing. Hermione, however, said, 
“Good for you, Dobby!” 

“Thank you, miss!” said Dobby, grinning toothily at 
her. “But most wizards doesn’t want a house-elf who 
wants paying, miss. That’s not the point of a house- 
elf,’ they says, and they slammed the door in Dobby ’s 
face! Dobby likes work, but he wants to wear clothes 
and he wants to be paid, Harry Potter. . . . Dobby likes 
being free!” 

The Hogwarts house-elves had now started edging 
away from Dobby, as though he were carrying 
something contagious. Winky, however, remained 

Page | 417 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




where she was, though there was a definite increase 
in the volume of her crying. 

“And then, Harry Potter, Dobby goes to visit Winky, 
and finds out Winky has been freed too, sir!” said 
Dobby delightedly. 

At this, Winky flung herself forward off her stool and 
lay facedown on the flagged stone floor, beating her 
tiny fists upon it and positively screaming with 
misery. Hermione hastily dropped down to her knees 
beside her and tried to comfort her, but nothing she 
said made the slightest difference. Dobby continued 
with his story, shouting shrilly over Winky’s 
screeches. 

“And then Dobby had the idea, Harry Potter, sir! Why 
doesn’t Dobby and Winky find work together?’ Dobby 
says. Where is there enough work for two house- 
elves?’ says Winky. And Dobby thinks, and it comes 
to him, sir! Hogwarts\ So Dobby and Winky came to 
see Professor Dumbledore, sir, and Professor 
Dumbledore took us on!” 

Dobby beamed very brightly, and happy tears welled 
in his eyes again. 

“And Professor Dumbledore says he will pay Dobby, 
sir, if Dobby wants paying! And so Dobby is a free elf, 
sir, and Dobby gets a Galleon a week and one day off 
a month!” 

“That’s not very much!” Hermione shouted 
indignantly from the floor, over Winky’s continued 
screaming and fist-beating. 

“Professor Dumbledore offered Dobby ten Galleons a 
week, and weekends off,” said Dobby, suddenly giving 
a little shiver, as though the prospect of so much 

Page | 418 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




leisure and riches were frightening, “but Dobby beat 
him down, miss. ... Dobby likes freedom, miss, but he 
isn’t wanting too much, miss, he likes work better.” 

“And how much is Professor Dumbledore paying you, 
Winky?” Hermione asked kindly. 

If she had thought this would cheer up Winky, she 
was wildly mistaken. Winky did stop crying, but when 
she sat up she was glaring at Hermione through her 
massive brown eyes, her whole face sopping wet and 
suddenly furious. 

“Winky is a disgraced elf, but Winky is not yet getting 
paid!” she squeaked. “Winky is not sunk so low as 
that! Winky is properly ashamed of being freed!” 

“Ashamed?” said Hermione blankly. “But — Winky, 
come on! It’s Mr. Crouch who should be ashamed, not 
you! You didn’t do anything wrong, he was really 
horrible to you — ” 

But at these words, Winky clapped her hands over 
the holes in her hat, flattening her ears so that she 
couldn’t hear a word, and screeched, “You is not 
insulting my master, miss! You is not insulting Mr. 
Crouch! Mr. Crouch is a good wizard, miss! Mr. 
Crouch is right to sack bad Winky!” 

“Winky is having trouble adjusting, Harry Potter,” 
squeaked Dobby confidentially. “Winky forgets she is 
not bound to Mr. Crouch anymore; she is allowed to 
speak her mind now, but she won’t do it.” 

“Can’t house-elves speak their minds about their 
masters, then?” Harry asked. 

“Oh no, sir, no,” said Dobby, looking suddenly 
serious. “ Tis part of the house-elf’s enslavement, sir. 

Page | 419 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




We keeps their secrets and our silence, sir. We 
upholds the family’s honor, and we never speaks ill of 
them — though Professor Dumbledore told Dobby he 
does not insist upon this. Professor Dumbledore said 
we is free to — to — ” 

Dobby looked suddenly nervous and beckoned Harry 
closer. Harry bent forward. Dobby whispered, “He 
said we is free to call him a — a barmy old codger if 
we likes, sir!” 

Dobby gave a frightened sort of giggle. 

“But Dobby is not wanting to, Harry Potter,” he said, 
talking normally again, and shaking his head so that 
his ears flapped. “Dobby likes Professor Dumbledore 
very much, sir, and is proud to keep his secrets and 
our silence for him.” 

“But you can say what you like about the Malfoys 
now?” Harry asked him, grinning. 

A slightly fearful look came into Dobby’s immense 
eyes. 

“Dobby — Dobby could,” he said doubtfully. He 
squared his small shoulders. “Dobby could tell Harry 
Potter that his old masters were — were — bad Dark 
wizards'.” 

Dobby stood for a moment, quivering all over, horror- 
struck by his own daring — then he rushed over to 
the nearest table and began banging his head on it 
very hard, squealing, “ Bad Dobby ! Bad Dobby\” 

Harry seized Dobby by the back of his tie and pulled 
him away from the table. 



Page | 420 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Thank you, Harry Potter, thank you,” said Dobby 
breathlessly, rubbing his head. 

“You just need a bit of practice,” Harry said. 

“Practice!” squealed Winky furiously. “You is ought to 
be ashamed of yourself, Dobby, talking that way 
about your masters!” 

“They isn’t my masters anymore, Winky!” said Dobby 
defiantly. “Dobby doesn’t care what they think 
anymore!” 

“Oh you is a bad elf, Dobby!” moaned Winky, tears 
leaking down her face once more. “My poor Mr. 
Crouch, what is he doing without Winky? He is 
needing me, he is needing my help! I is looking after 
the Crouches all my life, and my mother is doing it 
before me, and my grandmother is doing it before her 
...oh what is they saying if they knew Winky was 
freed? Oh the shame, the shame!” She buried her face 
in her skirt again and bawled. 

“Winky,” said Hermione firmly, “I’m quite sure Mr. 
Crouch is getting along perfectly well without you. 
We’ve seen him, you know — ” 

“You is seeing my master?” said Winky breathlessly, 
raising her tearstained face out of her skirt once more 
and goggling at Hermione. “You is seeing him here at 
Hogwarts?” 

“Yes,” said Hermione, “he and Mr. Bagman are judges 
in the Tri-wizard Tournament.” 

“Mr. Bagman comes too?” squeaked Winky, and to 
Harry’s great surprise (and Ron’s and Hermione’s too, 
by the looks on their faces), she looked angry again. 



Page | 421 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Mr. Bagman is a bad wizard! A very bad wizard! My 
master isn’t liking him, oh no, not at all!” 

“Bagman — bad?” said Harry. 

“Oh yes,” Winky said, nodding her head furiously. 

“My master is telling Winky some things! But Winky 
is not saying ... Winky — Winky keeps her master’s 
secrets. ...” 

She dissolved yet again in tears; they could hear her 
sobbing into her skirt, “Poor master, poor master, no 
Winky to help him no more!” 

They couldn’t get another sensible word out of Winky. 
They left her to her crying and finished their tea, 
while Dobby chatted happily about his life as a free elf 
and his plans for his wages. 

“Dobby is going to buy a sweater next, Harry Potter!” 
he said happily, pointing at his bare chest. 

“Tell you what, Dobby,” said Ron, who seemed to have 
taken a great liking to the elf, “I’ll give you the one my 
mum knits me this Christmas, I always get one from 
her. You don’t mind maroon, do you?” 

Dobby was delighted. 

“We might have to shrink it a bit to fit you,” Ron told 
him, “but it’ll go well with your tea cozy.” 

As they prepared to take their leave, many of the 
surrounding elves pressed in upon them, offering 
snacks to take back upstairs. Hermione refused, with 
a pained look at the way the elves kept bowing and 
curtsying, but Harry and Ron loaded their pockets 
with cream cakes and pies. 



Page | 422 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Thanks a lot!” Harry said to the elves, who had all 
clustered around the door to say good night. “See 
you, Dobby!” 

“Harry Potter . . . can Dobby come and see you 
sometimes, sir?” Dobby asked tentatively. 

“ ’Course you can,” said Harry, and Dobby beamed. 

“You know what?” said Ron, once he, Hermione, and 
Harry had left the kitchens behind and were climbing 
the steps into the entrance hall again. “All these years 
I’ve been really impressed with Fred and George, 
nicking food from the kitchens — well, it’s not exactly 
difficult, is it? They can’t wait to give it away!” 

“I think this is the best thing that could have 
happened to those elves, you know,” said Hermione, 
leading the way back up the marble staircase. “Dobby 
coming to work here, I mean. The other elves will see 
how happy he is, being free, and slowly it’ll dawn on 
them that they want that too!” 

“Let’s hope they don’t look too closely at Winky,” said 
Harry. 

“Oh shell cheer up,” said Hermione, though she 
sounded a bit doubtful. “Once the shock’s worn off, 
and she’s got used to Hogwarts, she’ll see how much 
better off she is without that Crouch man.” 

“She seems to love him,” said Ron thickly (he had just 
started on a cream cake) . 

“Doesn’t think much of Bagman, though, does she?” 
said Harry. “Wonder what Crouch says at home about 
him?” 



Page | 423 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Probably says he’s not a very good Head of 
Department,” said Hermione, “and let’s face it ... he’s 
got a point, hasn’t he?” 

“I’d still rather work for him than old Crouch,” said 
Ron. “At least Bagman’s got a sense of humor.” 

“Don’t let Percy hear you saying that,” Hermione said, 
smiling slightly. 

“Yeah, well, Percy wouldn’t want to work for anyone 
with a sense of humor, would he?” said Ron, now 
starting on a chocolate eclair. “Percy wouldn’t 
recognize a joke if it danced naked in front of him 
wearing Dobby’s tea cozy.” 



Page | 424 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 





THE UNEXPECTED TASK 

“Potter! Weasley! Will you pay attention?” 

Professor McGonagall’s irritated voice cracked like a 
whip through the Transfiguration class on Thursday, 
and Harry and Ron both jumped and looked up. 

It was the end of the lesson; they had finished their 
work; the guinea fowl they had been changing into 
guinea pigs had been shut away in a large cage on 
Professor McGonagall’s desk (Neville’s still had 
feathers); they had copied down their homework from 
the blackboard (“Describe, with examples, the ways in 
which Transforming Spells must be adapted when 
performing Cross-Species Switches”). The bell was due 
to ring at any moment, and Harry and Ron, who had 
been having a sword fight with a couple of Fred and 
George’s fake wands at the back of the class, looked 
up, Ron holding a tin parrot and Harry, a rubber 
haddock. 

“Now that Potter and Weasley have been kind enough 
to act their age,” said Professor McGonagall, with an 

Page | 425 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



angry look at the pair of them as the head of Harry’s 
haddock drooped and fell silently to the floor — Ron’s 
parrot’s beak had severed it moments before — “I 
have something to say to you all. 

“The Yule Ball is approaching — a traditional part of 
the Tri-wizard Tournament and an opportunity for us 
to socialize with our foreign guests. Now, the ball will 
be open only to fourth years and above — although 
you may invite a younger student if you wish — ” 

Lavender Brown let out a shrill giggle. Parvati Patil 
nudged her hard in the ribs, her face working 
furiously as she too fought not to giggle. They both 
looked around at Harry. Professor McGonagall 
ignored them, which Harry thought was distinctly 
unfair, as she had just told off him and Ron. 

“Dress robes will be worn,” Professor McGonagall 
continued, “and the ball will start at eight o’clock on 
Christmas Day, finishing at midnight in the Great 
Hall. Now then — ” 

Professor McGonagall stared deliberately around the 
class. 

“The Yule Ball is of course a chance for us all to — er 
— let our hair down,” she said, in a disapproving 
voice. 

Lavender giggled harder than ever, with her hand 
pressed hard against her mouth to stifle the sound. 
Harry could see what was funny this time: Professor 
McGonagall, with her hair in a tight bun, looked as 
though she had never let her hair down in any sense. 

“But that does NOT mean,” Professor McGonagall 
went on, “that we will be relaxing the standards of 
behavior we expect from Hogwarts students. I will be 

Page | 426 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




most seriously displeased if a Gryffindor student 
embarrasses the school in any way.” 

The bell rang, and there was the usual scuffle of 
activity as everyone packed their bags and swung 
them onto their shoulders. 

Professor McGonagall called above the noise, “Potter 
— a word, if you please.” 

Assuming this had something to do with his headless 
rubber haddock, Harry proceeded gloomily to the 
teacher’s desk. Professor McGonagall waited until the 
rest of the class had gone, and then said, “Potter, the 
champions and their partners — ” 

“What partners?” said Harry. 

Professor McGonagall looked suspiciously at him, as 
though she thought he was trying to be funny. 

“Your partners for the Yule Ball, Potter,” she said 
coldly. “Your dance partners.” 

Harry’s insides seemed to curl up and shrivel. 

“Dance partners?” He felt himself going red. “I don’t 
dance,” he said quickly. 

“Oh yes, you do,” said Professor McGonagall irritably. 
“That’s what I’m telling you. Traditionally, the 
champions and their partners open the ball.” 

Harry had a sudden mental image of himself in a top 
hat and tails, accompanied by a girl in the sort of 
frilly dress Aunt Petunia always wore to Uncle 
Vernon’s work parties. 

“I’m not dancing,” he said. 

Page | 427 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It is traditional,” said Professor McGonagall firmly. 
“You are a Hogwarts champion, and you will do what 
is expected of you as a representative of the school. 

So make sure you get yourself a partner, Potter.” 

“But — I don’t — ” 

“You heard me, Potter,” said Professor McGonagall in 
a very final sort of way. 

A week ago, Harry would have said finding a partner 
for a dance would be a cinch compared to taking on a 
Hungarian Horntail. But now that he had done the 
latter, and was facing the prospect of asking a girl to 
the ball, he thought he’d rather have another round 
with the dragon. 

Harry had never known so many people to put their 
names down to stay at Hogwarts for Christmas; he 
always did, of course, because the alternative was 
usually going back to Privet Drive, but he had always 
been very much in the minority before now. This year, 
however, everyone in the fourth year and above 
seemed to be staying, and they all seemed to Harry to 
be obsessed with the coming ball — or at least all the 
girls were, and it was amazing how many girls 
Hogwarts suddenly seemed to hold; he had never 
quite noticed that before. Girls giggling and 
whispering in the corridors, girls shrieking with 
laughter as boys passed them, girls excitedly 
comparing notes on what they were going to wear on 
Christmas night. ... 

“Why do they have to move in packs?” Harry asked 
Ron as a dozen or so girls walked past them, 
sniggering and staring at Harry. “How’re you 
supposed to get one on their own to ask them?” 



Page | 428 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Lasso one?” Ron suggested. “Got any idea who you’re 
going to try?” 

Harry didn’t answer. He knew perfectly well whom 
he’d like to ask, but working up the nerve was 
something else. ... Cho was a year older than he was; 
she was very pretty; she was a very good Quidditch 
player, and she was also very popular. 

Ron seemed to know what was going on inside 
Harry’s head. 

“Listen, you’re not going to have any trouble. You’re a 
champion. You’ve just beaten a Hungarian Horntail. I 
bet they 11 be queuing up to go with you.” 

In tribute to their recently repaired friendship, Ron 
had kept the bitterness in his voice to a bare 
minimum. Moreover, to Harry’s amazement, he 
turned out to be quite right. 

A curly-haired third-year Hufflepuff girl to whom 
Harry had never spoken in his life asked him to go to 
the ball with her the very next day. Harry was so 
taken aback he said no before he’d even stopped to 
consider the matter. The girl walked off looking rather 
hurt, and Harry had to endure Dean’s, Seamus’s, and 
Ron’s taunts about her all through History of Magic. 
The following day, two more girls asked him, a second 
year and (to his horror) a fifth year who looked as 
though she might knock him out if he refused. 

“She was quite good-looking,” said Ron fairly, after 
he’d stopped laughing. 

“She was a foot taller than me,” said Harry, still 
unnerved. “Imagine what I’d look like trying to dance 
with her.” 



Page | 429 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione’s words about Krum kept coming back to 
him. “They only like him because he’s famous!” Harry 
doubted very much if any of the girls who had asked 
to be his partner so far would have wanted to go to 
the ball with him if he hadn’t been a school 
champion. Then he wondered if this would bother 
him if Cho asked him. 

On the whole, Harry had to admit that even with the 
embarrassing prospect of opening the ball before him, 
life had definitely improved since he had got through 
the first task. He wasn’t attracting nearly as much 
unpleasantness in the corridors anymore, which he 
suspected had a lot to do with Cedric — he had an 
idea Cedric might have told the Hufflepuffs to leave 
Harry alone, in gratitude for Harry’s tip-off about the 
dragons. There seemed to be fewer Support Cedric 
Diggoryl badges around too. Draco Malfoy, of course, 
was still quoting Rita Skeeter’s article to him at every 
possible opportunity, but he was getting fewer and 
fewer laughs out of it — and just to heighten Harry’s 
feeling of well-being, no story about Hagrid had 
appeared in the Daily Prophet 

“She didn’ seem very int’rested in magical creatures, 
ter tell yeh the truth,” Hagrid said, when Harry, Ron, 
and Hermione asked him how his interview with Rita 
Skeeter had gone during the last Care of Magical 
Creatures lesson of the term. To their very great relief, 
Hagrid had given up on direct contact with the 
skrewts now, and they were merely sheltering behind 
his cabin today, sitting at a trestle table and 
preparing a fresh selection of food with which to 
tempt the skrewts. 

“She jus’ wanted me ter talk about you, Harry,” 

Hagrid continued in a low voice. “Well, I told her we’d 
been friends since I went ter fetch yeh from the 
Dursleys. ‘Never had to tell him off in four years?’ she 

Page | 430 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




said. ‘Never played you up in lessons, has he?’ I told 
her no, an’ she didn’ seem happy at all. Yeh’d think 
she wanted me to say yeh were horrible, Harry.” 

“ ’Course she did,” said Harry, throwing lumps of 
dragon liver into a large metal bowl and picking up 
his knife to cut some more. “She can’t keep writing 
about what a tragic little hero I am, it’ll get boring.” 

“She wants a new angle, Hagrid,” said Ron wisely as 
he shelled salamander eggs. “You were supposed to 
say Harry’s a mad delinquent!” 

“But he’s not!” said Hagrid, looking genuinely 
shocked. 

“She should’ve interviewed Snape,” said Harry grimly. 
“He’d give her the goods on me any day. ‘Potter has 
been crossing lines ever since he first arrived at this 
school. . . . ’ ” 

“Said that, did he?” said Hagrid, while Ron and 
Hermione laughed. “Well, yeh might’ve bent a few 
rules, Harry, bu’ yeh’re all righ’ really, aren’ you?” 

“Cheers, Hagrid,” said Harry, grinning. 

“You coming to this ball thing on Christmas Day, 
Hagrid?” said Ron. 

“Though’ I might look in on it, yeah,” said Hagrid 
gruffly. “Should be a good do, I reckon. You’ll be 
openin’ the dancin’, won’ yeh, Harry? Who ’re you 
takin’?” 

“No one, yet,” said Harry, feeling himself going red 
again. Hagrid didn’t pursue the subject. 



Page | 431 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The last week of term became increasingly boisterous 
as it progressed. Rumors about the Yule Ball were 
flying everywhere, though Harry didn’t believe half of 
them — for instance, that Dumbledore had bought 
eight hundred barrels of mulled mead from Madam 
Rosmerta. It seemed to be fact, however, that he had 
booked the Weird Sisters. Exactly who or what the 
Weird Sisters were Harry didn’t know, never having 
had access to a wizard’s wireless, but he deduced 
from the wild excitement of those who had grown up 
listening to the WWN (Wizarding Wireless Network) 
that they were a very famous musical group. 

Some of the teachers, like little Professor Flitwick, 
gave up trying to teach them much when their minds 
were so clearly elsewhere; he allowed them to play 
games in his lesson on Wednesday, and spent most of 
it talking to Harry about the perfect Summoning 
Charm Harry had used during the first task of the 
Triwizard Tournament. Other teachers were not so 
generous. Nothing would ever deflect Professor Binns, 
for example, from plowing on through his notes on 
goblin rebellions — as Binns hadn’t let his own death 
stand in the way of continuing to teach, they 
supposed a small thing like Christmas wasn’t going to 
put him off. It was amazing how he could make even 
bloody and vicious goblin riots sound as boring as 
Percy’s cauldron-bottom report. Professors 
McGonagall and Moody kept them working until the 
very last second of their classes too, and Snape, of 
course, would no sooner let them play games in class 
than adopt Harry. Staring nastily around at them all, 
he informed them that he would be testing them on 
poison antidotes during the last lesson of the term. 

“Evil, he is,” Ron said bitterly that night in the 
Gryffindor common room. “Springing a test on us on 
the last day. Ruining the last bit of term with a whole 
load of studying.” 

Page | 432 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Mmm ... you’re not exactly straining yourself, 
though, are you?” said Hermione, looking at him over 
the top of her Potions notes. Ron was busy building a 
card castle out of his Exploding Snap pack — a much 
more interesting pastime than with Muggle cards, 
because of the chance that the whole thing would 
blow up at any second. 

“It’s Christmas, Hermione,” said Harry lazily; he was 
rereading Flying with the Cannons for the tenth time 
in an armchair near the fire. 

Hermione looked severely over at him too. “I’d have 
thought you’d be doing something constructive, 

Harry, even if you don’t want to learn your antidotes!” 

“Like what?” Harry said as he watched Joey Jenkins 
of the Cannons belt a Bludger toward a Ballycastle 
Bats Chaser. 

“That egg!” Hermione hissed. 

“Come on, Hermione, I’ve got till February the twenty- 
fourth,” Harry said. 

He had put the golden egg upstairs in his trunk and 
hadn’t opened it since the celebration party after the 
first task. There were still two and a half months to go 
until he needed to know what all the screechy wailing 
meant, after all. 

“But it might take weeks to work it out!” said 
Hermione. “You’re going to look a real idiot if everyone 
else knows what the next task is and you don’t!” 

“Leave him alone, Hermione, he’s earned a bit of a 
break,” said Ron, and he placed the last two cards on 
top of the castle and the whole lot blew up, singeing 
his eyebrows. 

Page | 433 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Nice look, Ron ... go well with your dress robes, that 
will.” 



It was Fred and George. They sat down at the table 
with Harry, Ron, and Hermione as Ron felt how much 
damage had been done. 

“Ron, can we borrow Pigwidgeon?” George asked. 

“No, he’s off delivering a letter,” said Ron. “Why?” 

“Because George wants to invite him to the ball,” said 
Fred sarcastically. 

“Because we want to send a letter, you stupid great 
prat,” said George. 

“Who d’you two keep writing to, eh?” said Ron. 

“Nose out, Ron, or I’ll burn that for you too,” said 
Fred, waving his wand threateningly. “So ... you lot 
got dates for the ball yet?” 

“Nope,” said Ron. 

“Well, you’d better hurry up, mate, or all the good 
ones will be gone,” said Fred. 

“Who’re you going with, then?” said Ron. 

“Angelina,” said Fred promptly, without a trace of 
embarrassment. 

“What?” said Ron, taken aback. “You’ve already asked 
her?” 

“Good point,” said Fred. He turned his head and 
called across the common room, “Oi! Angelina!” 

Page | 434 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Angelina, who had been chatting with Alicia Spinnet 
near the fire, looked over at him. 



“What?” she called back. 

“Want to come to the ball with me?” 

Angelina gave Fred an appraising sort of look. 

“All right, then,” she said, and she turned back to 
Alicia and carried on chatting with a bit of a grin on 
her face. 

“There you go,” said Fred to Harry and Ron, “piece of 
cake.” 

He got to his feet, yawning, and said, “We’d better use 
a school owl then, George, come on. ...” 

They left. Ron stopped feeling his eyebrows and 
looked across the smoldering wreck of his card castle 
at Harry. 

“We should get a move on, you know ... ask someone. 
He’s right. We don’t want to end up with a pair of 
trolls.” 

Hermione let out a sputter of indignation. 

“A pair of . . . what, excuse me?” 

“Well — you know,” said Ron, shrugging. “I’d rather 
go alone than with — with Eloise Midgen, say.” 

“Her acne’s loads better lately — and she’s really 
nice!” 

“Her nose is off-center,” said Ron. 

Page | 435 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh I see,” Hermione said, bristling. “So basically, 
you’re going to take the best-looking girl who’ll have 
you, even if she’s completely horrible?” 

“Er — yeah, that sounds about right,” said Ron. 

“I’m going to bed,” Hermione snapped, and she swept 
off toward the girls’ staircase without another word. 

The Hogwarts staff, demonstrating a continued desire 
to impress the visitors from Beauxbatons and 
Durmstrang, seemed determined to show the castle at 
its best this Christmas. When the decorations went 
up, Harry noticed that they were the most stunning 
he had yet seen inside the school. Everlasting icicles 
had been attached to the banisters of the marble 
staircase; the usual twelve Christmas trees in the 
Great Hall were bedecked with everything from 
luminous holly berries to real, hooting, golden owls, 
and the suits of armor had all been bewitched to sing 
carols whenever anyone passed them. It was quite 
something to hear “O Come, All Ye Faithful” sung by 
an empty helmet that only knew half the words. 
Several times, Filch the caretaker had to extract 
Peeves from inside the armor, where he had taken to 
hiding, filling in the gaps in the songs with lyrics of 
his own invention, all of which were very rude. 

And still, Harry hadn’t asked Cho to the ball. He and 
Ron were getting very nervous now, though as Harry 
pointed out, Ron would look much less stupid than 
he would without a partner; Harry was supposed to 
be starting the dancing with the other champions. 

“I suppose there’s always Moaning Myrtle,” he said 
gloomily, referring to the ghost who haunted the girls’ 
toilets on the second floor. 



Page | 436 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Harry — we’ve just got to grit our teeth and do it,” 
said Ron on Friday morning, in a tone that suggested 
they were planning the storming of an impregnable 
fortress. “When we get back to the common room 
tonight, we’ll both have partners — agreed?” 

“Er ... okay,” said Harry. 

But every time he glimpsed Cho that day — during 
break, and then lunchtime, and once on the way to 
History of Magic — she was surrounded by friends. 
Didn’t she ever go anywhere alone? Could he perhaps 
ambush her as she was going into a bathroom? But 
no — she even seemed to go there with an escort of 
four or five girls. Yet if he didn’t do it soon, she was 
bound to have been asked by somebody else. 

He found it hard to concentrate on Snape’s Potions 
test, and consequently forgot to add the key 
ingredient — a bezoar — meaning that he received 
bottom marks. He didn’t care, though; he was too 
busy screwing up his courage for what he was about 
to do. When the bell rang, he grabbed his bag, and 
hurried to the dungeon door. 

“I’ll meet you at dinner,” he said to Ron and 
Hermione, and he dashed off upstairs. 

He’d just have to ask Cho for a private word, that was 
all. ... He hurried off through the packed corridors 
looking for her, and (rather sooner than he had 
expected) he found her, emerging from a Defense 
Against the Dark Arts lesson. 

“Er — Cho? Could I have a word with you?” 

Giggling should be made illegal, Harry thought 
furiously, as all the girls around Cho started doing it. 



Page | 437 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




She didn’t, though. She said, “Okay,” and followed 
him out of earshot of her classmates. 

Harry turned to look at her and his stomach gave a 
weird lurch as though he had missed a step going 
downstairs. 

“Er,” he said. 

He couldn’t ask her. He couldn’t. But he had to. Cho 
stood there looking puzzled, watching him. 

The words came out before Harry had quite got his 
tongue around them. 

“Wangoballwime?” 

“Sorry?” said Cho. 

“D’you — d’you want to go to the ball with me?” said 
Harry. Why did he have to go red now? Why ? 

“Oh!” said Cho, and she went red too. “Oh Harry, I’m 
really sorry,” and she truly looked it. “I’ve already said 
I’ll go with someone else.” 

“Oh,” said Harry. 

It was odd; a moment before his insides had been 
writhing like snakes, but suddenly he didn’t seem to 
have any insides at all. 

“Oh okay,” he said, “no problem.” 

“I’m really sorry,” she said again. 

“That’s okay,” said Harry. 



Page | 438 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




They stood there looking at each other, and then Cho 
said, “Well — ” 

“Yeah,” said Harry. 

“Well, ’bye,” said Cho, still very red. She walked away. 
Harry called after her, before he could stop himself. 
“Who ’re you going with?” 

“Oh — Cedric,” she said. “Cedric Diggory.” 

“Oh right,” said Harry. 

His insides had come back again. It felt as though 
they had been filled with lead in their absence. 

Completely forgetting about dinner, he walked slowly 
back up to Gryffindor Tower, Cho’s voice echoing in 
his ears with every step he took. “ Cedric — Cedric 
Diggory.” He had been starting to quite like Cedric — 
prepared to overlook the fact that he had once beaten 
him at Quidditch, and was handsome, and popular, 
and nearly everyone’s favorite champion. Now he 
suddenly realized that Cedric was in fact a useless 
pretty boy who didn’t have enough brains to fill an 
eggcup. 

“Fairy lights,” he said dully to the Fat Lady — the 
password had been changed the previous day. 

“Yes, indeed, dear!” she trilled, straightening her new 
tinsel hair band as she swung forward to admit him. 

Entering the common room, Harry looked around, 
and to his surprise he saw Ron sitting ashen-faced in 
a distant corner. Ginny was sitting with him, talking 
to him in what seemed to be a low, soothing voice. 

Page | 439 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What’s up, Ron?” said Harry, joining them. 



Ron looked up at Harry, a sort of blind horror in his 
face. 

“Why did I do it?” he said wildly. “I don’t know what 
made me do it!” 

“What?” said Harry. 

“He — er — just asked Fleur Delacour to go to the 
ball with him,” said Ginny. She looked as though she 
was fighting back a smile, but she kept patting Ron’s 
arm sympathetically. 

“You what?” said Harry. 

“I don’t know what made me do it!” Ron gasped again. 
“What was I playing at? There were people — all 
around — I’ve gone mad — everyone watching! I was 
just walking past her in the entrance hall — she was 
standing there talking to Diggory — and it sort of 
came over me — and I asked her!” 

Ron moaned and put his face in his hands. He kept 
talking, though the words were barely 
distinguishable. 

“She looked at me like I was a sea slug or something. 
Didn’t even answer. And then — I dunno — I just sort 
of came to my senses and ran for it.” 

“She’s part veela,” said Harry. “You were right — her 
grandmother was one. It wasn’t your fault, I bet you 
just walked past when she was turning on the old 
charm for Diggory and got a blast of it — but she was 
wasting her time. He’s going with Cho Chang.” 

Ron looked up. 

Page | 440 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I asked her to go with me just now,” Harry said dully, 
“and she told me.” 

Ginny had suddenly stopped smiling. 

“This is mad,” said Ron. “We’re the only ones left who 
haven’t got anyone — well, except Neville. Hey — 
guess who he asked? Hermionel” 

“ What?” said Harry, completely distracted by this 
startling news. 

“Yeah, I know!” said Ron, some of the color coming 
back into his face as he started to laugh. “He told me 
after Potions! Said she’s always been really nice, 
helping him out with work and stuff — but she told 
him she was already going with someone. Ha! As if! 
She just didn’t want to go with Neville ... I mean, who 
would?” 

“Don’t!” said Ginny, annoyed. “Don’t laugh — ” 

Just then Hermione climbed in through the portrait 
hole. 

“Why weren’t you two at dinner?” she said, coming 
over to join them. 

“Because — oh shut up laughing, you two — because 
they’ve both just been turned down by girls they 
asked to the ball!” said Ginny. 

That shut Harry and Ron up. 

“Thanks a bunch, Ginny,” said Ron sourly. 

“All the good-looking ones taken, Ron?” said 
Hermione loftily. “Eloise Midgen starting to look quite 



Page | 441 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




pretty now, is she? Well, I’m sure you’ll find someone 
somewhere who’ll have you.” 

But Ron was staring at Hermione as though suddenly 
seeing her in a whole new light. 

“Hermione, Neville’s right — you are a girl. ...” 

“Oh well spotted,” she said acidly. 

“Well — you can come with one of us!” 

“No, I can’t,” snapped Hermione. 

“Oh come on,” he said impatiently, “we need partners, 
we’re going to look really stupid if we haven’t got any, 
everyone else has ...” 

“I can’t come with you,” said Hermione, now blushing, 
“because I’m already going with someone.” 

“No, you’re not!” said Ron. “You just said that to get 
rid of Neville!” 

“Oh did I?” said Hermione, and her eyes flashed 
dangerously. “Just because it’s taken you three years 
to notice, Ron, doesn’t mean no one else has spotted 
I’m a girl!” 

Ron stared at her. Then he grinned again. 

“Okay, okay, we know you’re a girl,” he said. “That 
do? Will you come now?” 

“I’ve already told you!” Hermione said very angrily. 

“I’m going with someone else!” 

And she stormed off toward the girls’ dormitories 
again. 

Page | 442 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“She’s lying,” said Ron flatly, watching her go. 

“She’s not,” said Ginny quietly. 

“Who is it then?” said Ron sharply. 

“I’m not telling you, it’s her business,” said Ginny. 

“Right,” said Ron, who looked extremely put out, “this 
is getting stupid. Ginny, you can go with Harry, and 
I’ll just—” 

“I can’t,” said Ginny, and she went scarlet too. “I’m 
going with — with Neville. He asked me when 
Hermione said no, and I thought ... well ... I’m not 
going to be able to go otherwise, I’m not in fourth 
year.” She looked extremely miserable. “I think I’ll go 
and have dinner,” she said, and she got up and 
walked off to the portrait hole, her head bowed. 

Ron goggled at Harry. 

“What’s got into them?” he demanded. 

But Harry had just seen Parvati and Lavender come 
in through the portrait hole. The time had come for 
drastic action. 

“Wait here,” he said to Ron, and he stood up, walked 
straight up to Parvati, and said, “Parvati? Will you go 
to the ball with me?” 

Parvati went into a fit of giggles. Harry waited for 
them to subside, his fingers crossed in the pocket of 
his robes. 

“Yes, all right then,” she said finally, blushing 
furiously. 



Page | 443 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Thanks,” said Harry, in relief. “Lavender — will you 
go with Ron?” 

“She’s going with Seamus,” said Parvati, and the pair 
of them giggled harder than ever. 

Harry sighed. 

“Can’t you think of anyone who’d go with Ron?” he 
said, lowering his voice so that Ron wouldn’t hear. 

“What about Hermione Granger?” said Parvati. 

“She’s going with someone else.” 

Parvati looked astonished. 

“Ooooh — who?” she said keenly. 

Harry shrugged. “No idea,” he said. “So what about 
Ron?” 

“Well ...” said Parvati slowly, “I suppose my sister 
might ... Padma, you know ... in Ravenclaw. I’ll ask 
her if you like.” 

“Yeah, that would be great,” said Harry. “Let me 
know, will you?” 

And he went back over to Ron, feeling that this ball 
was a lot more trouble than it was worth, and hoping 
very much that Padma Patil’s nose was dead center. 



Page | 444 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE YULE BALL 

Despite the very heavy load of homework that the 
fourth years had been given for the holidays, Harry 
was in no mood to work when term ended, and spent 
the week leading up to Christmas enjoying himself as 
fully as possible along with everyone else. Gryffindor 
Tower was hardly less crowded now than during 
term-time; it seemed to have shrunk slightly too, as 
its inhabitants were being so much rowdier than 
usual. Fred and George had had a great success with 
their Canary Creams, and for the first couple of days 
of the holidays, people kept bursting into feather all 
over the place. Before long, however, all the 
Gryffindors had learned to treat food anybody else 
offered them with extreme caution, in case it had a 
Canary Cream concealed in the center, and George 
confided to Harry that he and Fred were now working 
on developing something else. Harry made a mental 
note never to accept so much as a crisp from Fred 
and George in future. He still hadn’t forgotten Dudley 
and the Ton-Tongue Toffee. 



Page | 445 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



Snow was falling thickly upon the castle and its 
grounds now. The pale blue Beauxbatons carriage 
looked like a large, chilly, frosted pumpkin next to the 
iced gingerbread house that was Hagrid’s cabin, while 
the Durmstrang ship’s portholes were glazed with ice, 
the rigging white with frost. The house-elves down in 
the kitchen were outdoing themselves with a series of 
rich, warming stews and savory puddings, and only 
Fleur Delacour seemed to be able to find anything to 
complain about. 

“It is too ’eavy, all zis ’Ogwarts food,” they heard her 
saying grumpily as they left the Great Hall behind her 
one evening (Ron skulking behind Harry, keen not to 
be spotted by Fleur). “I will not fit into my dress 
robes!” 

“Oooh there’s a tragedy,” Hermione snapped as Fleur 
went out into the entrance hall. “She really thinks a 
lot of herself, that one, doesn’t she?” 

“Hermione — who are you going to the ball with?” 
said Ron. 

He kept springing this question on her, hoping to 
startle her into a response by asking it when she least 
expected it. However, Hermione merely frowned and 
said, “I’m not telling you, you’ll just make fun of me.” 

“You’re joking, Weasley!” said Malfoy, behind them. 
“You’re not telling me someone’s asked that to the 
ball? Not the long-molared Mudblood?” 

Harry and Ron both whipped around, but Hermione 
said loudly, waving to somebody over Malfoy’s 
shoulder, “Hello, Professor Moody!” 



Page | 446 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Malfoy went pale and jumped backward, looking 
wildly around for Moody, but he was still up at the 
staff table, finishing his stew. 

“Twitchy little ferret, aren’t you, Malfoy?” said 
Hermione scathingly, and she, Harry, and Ron went 
up the marble staircase laughing heartily. 

“Hermione,” said Ron, looking sideways at her, 
suddenly frowning, “your teeth ...” 

“What about them?” she said. 

“Well, they’re different ... I’ve just noticed. ...” 

“Of course they are — did you expect me to keep 
those fangs Malfoy gave me?” 

“No, I mean, they’re different to how they were before 
he put that hex on you. ... They’re all ... straight and 
— and normal-sized.” 

Hermione suddenly smiled very mischievously, and 
Harry noticed it too: It was a very different smile from 
the one he remembered. 

“Well ... when I went up to Madam Pomfrey to get 
them shrunk, she held up a mirror and told me to 
stop her when they were back to how they normally 
were,” she said. “And I just ... let her carry on a bit.” 
She smiled even more widely. “Mum and Dad won’t be 
too pleased. I’ve been trying to persuade them to let 
me shrink them for ages, but they wanted me to carry 
on with my braces. You know, they’re dentists, they 
just don’t think teeth and magic should — look! 
Pigwidgeon’s back!” 

Ron’s tiny owl was twittering madly on the top of the 
icicle-laden banisters, a scroll of parchment tied to 

Page | 447 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




his leg. People passing him were pointing and 
laughing, and a group of third-year girls paused and 
said, “Oh look at the weeny owl! Isn’t he cute?” 

“Stupid little feathery git!” Ron hissed, hurrying up 
the stairs and snatching up Pigwidgeon. “You bring 
letters to the addressee! You don’t hang around 
showing off!” 

Pigwidgeon hooted happily, his head protruding over 
Ron’s fist. The third-year girls all looked very 
shocked. 

“Clear off!” Ron snapped at them, waving the fist 
holding Pigwidgeon, who hooted more happily than 
ever as he soared through the air. “Here — take it, 
Harry,” Ron added in an undertone as the third-year 
girls scuttled away looking scandalized. He pulled 
Sirius’s reply off Pigwidgeon’s leg, Harry pocketed it, 
and they hurried back to Gryffindor Tower to read it. 

Everyone in the common room was much too busy in 
letting off more holiday steam to observe what anyone 
else was up to. Ron, Harry, and Hermione sat apart 
from everyone else by a dark window that was 
gradually filling up with snow, and Harry read out: 

Dear Harry, 

Congratulations on getting past the Horntail. Whoever 
put your name in that goblet shouldn’t be feeling too 
happy right now! I was going to suggest a 
Conjunctivitis Curse, as a dragon’s eyes are its 
weakest point — “That’s what Krum did!” Hermione 
whispered — but your way was better, I’m impressed. 

Don’t get complacent, though, Harry. You’ve only done 
one task; whoever put you in for the tournament’s got 
plenty more opportunity if they’re trying to hurt you. 

Page | 448 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Keep your eyes open — particularly when the person 
we discussed is around — and concentrate on keeping 
yourself out of trouble. 

Keep in touch, I still want to hear about anything 
unusual. 

Sirius 

“He sounds exactly like Moody,” said Harry quietly, 
tucking the letter away again inside his robes. “ 
‘Constant vigilance!’ You’d think I walk around with 
my eyes shut, banging off the walls. ...” 

“But he’s right, Harry,” said Hermione, “you have still 
got two tasks to do. You really ought to have a look at 
that egg, you know, and start working out what it 
means. ...” 

“Hermione, he’s got ages!” snapped Ron. “Want a 
game of chess, Harry?” 

“Yeah, okay,” said Harry. Then, spotting the look on 
Hermione ’s face, he said, “Come on, how’m I 
supposed to concentrate with all this noise going on? 

I won’t even be able to hear the egg over this lot.” 

“Oh I suppose not,” she sighed, and she sat down to 
watch their chess match, which culminated in an 
exciting checkmate of Ron’s, involving a couple of 
recklessly brave pawns and a very violent bishop. 

Harry awoke very suddenly on Christmas Day. 
Wondering what had caused his abrupt return to 
consciousness, he opened his eyes, and saw 
something with very large, round, green eyes staring 
back at him in the darkness, so close they were 
almost nose to nose. 



Page | 449 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Dobbyl” Harry yelled, scrambling away from the elf 
so fast he almost fell out of bed. “Don’t do that!” 

“Dobby is sorry, sir!” squeaked Dobby anxiously, 
jumping backward with his long fingers over his 
mouth. “Dobby is only wanting to wish Harry Potter 
‘Merry Christmas’ and bring him a present, sir! Harry 
Potter did say Dobby could come and see him 
sometimes, sir!” 

“It’s okay,” said Harry, still breathing rather faster 
than usual, while his heart rate returned to normal. 
“Just — just prod me or something in future, all right, 
don’t bend over me like that. ...” 

Harry pulled back the curtains around his four- 
poster, took his glasses from his bedside table, and 
put them on. His yell had awoken Ron, Seamus, 

Dean, and Neville. All of them were peering through 
the gaps in their own hangings, heavy-eyed and 
tousle-haired. 

“Someone attacking you, Harry?” Seamus asked 
sleepily. 

“No, it’s just Dobby,” Harry muttered. “Go back to 
sleep.” 

“Nah ... presents!” said Seamus, spotting the large 
pile at the foot of his bed. Ron, Dean, and Neville 
decided that now they were awake they might as well 
get down to some present-opening too. Harry turned 
back to Dobby, who was now standing nervously next 
to Harry’s bed, still looking worried that he had upset 
Harry. There was a Christmas bauble tied to the loop 
on top of his tea cozy. 

“Can Dobby give Harry Potter his present?” he 
squeaked tentatively. 

Page | 450 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“ ’Course you can,” said Harry. “Er ... I’ve got 
something for you too.” 

It was a lie; he hadn’t bought anything for Dobby at 
all, but he quickly opened his trunk and pulled out a 
particularly knobbly rolled-up pair of socks. They 
were his oldest and foulest, mustard yellow, and had 
once belonged to Uncle Vernon. The reason they were 
extra-knobbly was that Harry had been using them to 
cushion his Sneakoscope for over a year now. He 
pulled out the Sneakoscope and handed the socks to 
Dobby, saying, “Sorry, I forgot to wrap them. ...” 

But Dobby was utterly delighted. 

“Socks are Dobby’s favorite, favorite clothes, sir!” he 
said, ripping off his odd ones and pulling on Uncle 
Vernon’s. “I has seven now, sir. ... But sir ...” he said, 
his eyes widening, having pulled both socks up to 
their highest extent, so that they reached to the 
bottom of his shorts, “they has made a mistake in the 
shop, Harry Potter, they is giving you two the same!” 

“Ah, no, Harry, how come you didn’t spot that?” said 
Ron, grinning over from his own bed, which was now 
strewn with wrapping paper. “Tell you what, Dobby — 
here you go — take these two, and you can mix them 
up properly. And here’s your sweater.” 

He threw Dobby a pair of violet socks he had just 
unwrapped, and the hand-knitted sweater Mrs. 
Weasley had sent. Dobby looked quite overwhelmed. 

“Sir is very kind!” he squeaked, his eyes brimming 
with tears again, bowing deeply to Ron. “Dobby knew 
sir must be a great wizard, for he is Harry Potter’s 
greatest friend, but Dobby did not know that he was 
also as generous of spirit, as noble, as selfless — ” 



Page | 451 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“They’re only socks,” said Ron, who had gone slightly 
pink around the ears, though he looked rather 
pleased all the same. “Wow, Harry — ” He had just 
opened Harry’s present, a Chudley Cannon hat. 

“Cool!” He jammed it onto his head, where it clashed 
horribly with his hair. 

Dobby now handed Harry a small package, which 
turned out to be — socks. 

“Dobby is making them himself, sir!” the elf said 
happily. “He is buying the wool out of his wages, sir!” 

The left sock was bright red and had a pattern of 
broomsticks upon it; the right sock was green with a 
pattern of Snitches. 

“They’re ... they’re really ... well, thanks, Dobby,” said 
Harry, and he pulled them on, causing Dobby’s eyes 
to leak with happiness again. 

“Dobby must go now, sir, we is already making 
Christmas dinner in the kitchens!” said Dobby, and 
he hurried out of the dormitory, waving good-bye to 
Ron and the others as he passed. 

Harry’s other presents were much more satisfactory 
than Dobby’s odd socks — with the obvious exception 
of the Dursleys’, which consisted of a single tissue, an 
all-time low — Harry supposed they too were 
remembering the Ton-Tongue Toffee. Hermione had 
given Harry a book called Quidditch Teams of Britain 
and Ireland ; Ron, a bulging bag of Dungbombs; 

Sirius, a handy penknife with attachments to unlock 
any lock and undo any knot; and Hagrid, a vast box 
of sweets including all Harry’s favorites: Bertie Bott’s 
Every Flavor Beans, Chocolate Frogs, Drooble’s Best 
Blowing Gum, and Fizzing Whizbees. There was also, 
of course, Mrs. Weasley’s usual package, including a 
Page | 452 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




new sweater (green, with a picture of a dragon on it — 
Harry supposed Charlie had told her all about the 
Horntail), and a large quantity of homemade mince 
pies. 

Harry and Ron met up with Hermione in the common 
room, and they went down to breakfast together. They 
spent most of the morning in Gryffindor Tower, where 
everyone was enjoying their presents, then returned 
to the Great Hall for a magnificent lunch, which 
included at least a hundred turkeys and Christmas 
puddings, and large piles of Cribbage’s Wizarding 
Crackers. 

They went out onto the grounds in the afternoon; the 
snow was untouched except for the deep channels 
made by the Durmstrang and Beauxbatons students 
on their way up to the castle. Hermione chose to 
watch Harry and the Weasleys’ snowball fight rather 
than join in, and at five o’clock said she was going 
back upstairs to get ready for the ball. 

“What, you need three hours?” said Ron, looking at 
her incredulously and paying for his lapse in 
concentration when a large snowball, thrown by 
George, hit him hard on the side of the head. “Who ’re 
you going with?” he yelled after Hermione, but she 
just waved and disappeared up the stone steps into 
the castle. 

There was no Christmas tea today, as the ball 
included a feast, so at seven o’clock, when it had 
become hard to aim properly, the others abandoned 
their snowball fight and trooped back to the common 
room. The Fat Lady was sitting in her frame with her 
friend Violet from downstairs, both of them extremely 
tipsy, empty boxes of chocolate liqueurs littering the 
bottom of her picture. 



Page | 453 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Lairy fights, that’s the one!” she giggled when they 
gave the password, and she swung forward to let 
them inside. 

Harry, Ron, Seamus, Dean, and Neville changed into 
their dress robes up in their dormitory, all of them 
looking very self-conscious, but none as much as 
Ron, who surveyed himself in the long mirror in the 
corner with an appalled look on his face. There was 
just no getting around the fact that his robes looked 
more like a dress than anything else. In a desperate 
attempt to make them look more manly, he used a 
Severing Charm on the ruff and cuffs. It worked fairly 
well; at least he was now lace-free, although he hadn’t 
done a very neat job, and the edges still looked 
depressingly frayed as the boys set off downstairs. 

“I still can’t work out how you two got the best- 
looking girls in the year,” muttered Dean. 

“Animal magnetism,” said Ron gloomily, pulling stray 
threads out of his cuffs. 

The common room looked strange, full of people 
wearing different colors instead of the usual mass of 
black. Parvati was waiting for Harry at the foot of the 
stairs. She looked very pretty indeed, in robes of 
shocking pink, with her long dark plait braided with 
gold, and gold bracelets glimmering at her wrists. 
Harry was relieved to see that she wasn’t giggling. 

“You — er — look nice,” he said awkwardly. 

“Thanks,” she said. “Padma’s going to meet you in the 
entrance hall,” she added to Ron. 

“Right,” said Ron, looking around. “Where’s 
Hermione?” 



Page | 454 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Parvati shrugged. “Shall we go down then, Harry?” 



“Okay,” said Harry, wishing he could just stay in the 
common room. Fred winked at Harry as he passed 
him on the way out of the portrait hole. 

The entrance hall was packed with students too, all 
milling around waiting for eight o’clock, when the 
doors to the Great Hall would be thrown open. Those 
people who were meeting partners from different 
Houses were edging through the crowd trying to find 
one another. Parvati found her sister, Padma, and led 
her over to Harry and Ron. 

“Hi,” said Padma, who was looking just as pretty as 
Parvati in robes of bright turquoise. She didn’t look 
too enthusiastic about having Ron as a partner, 
though; her dark eyes lingered on the frayed neck and 
sleeves of his dress robes as she looked him up and 
down. 

“Hi,” said Ron, not looking at her, but staring around 
at the crowd. “Oh no ...” 

He bent his knees slightly to hide behind Harry, 
because Fleur Delacour was passing, looking 
stunning in robes of silver-gray satin, and 
accompanied by the Ravenclaw Quidditch captain, 
Roger Davies. When they had disappeared, Ron stood 
straight again and stared over the heads of the crowd. 

“Where is Hermione?” he said again. 

A group of Slytherins came up the steps from their 
dungeon common room. Malfoy was in front; he was 
wearing dress robes of black velvet with a high collar, 
which in Harry’s opinion made him look like a vicar. 
Pansy Parkinson in very frilly robes of pale pink was 
clutching Malfoy’s arm. Crabbe and Goyle were both 
Page | 455 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




wearing green; they resembled moss-colored boulders, 
and neither of them, Harry was pleased to see, had 
managed to find a partner. 

The oak front doors opened, and everyone turned to 
look as the Durmstrang students entered with 
Professor Karkaroff. Krum was at the front of the 
party, accompanied by a pretty girl in blue robes 
Harry didn’t know. Over their heads he saw that an 
area of lawn right in front of the castle had been 
transformed into a sort of grotto full of fairy lights — 
meaning hundreds of actual living fairies were sitting 
in the rosebushes that had been conjured there, and 
fluttering over the statues of what seemed to be 
Father Christmas and his reindeer. 

Then Professor McGonagall’s voice called, 

“Champions over here, please!” 

Parvati readjusted her bangles, beaming; she and 
Harry said “See you in a minute” to Ron and Padma 
and walked forward, the chattering crowd parting to 
let them through. Professor McGonagall, who was 
wearing dress robes of red tartan and had arranged a 
rather ugly wreath of thistles around the brim of her 
hat, told them to wait on one side of the doors while 
everyone else went inside; they were to enter the 
Great Hall in procession when the rest of the students 
had sat down. Fleur Delacour and Roger Davies 
stationed themselves nearest the doors; Davies looked 
so stunned by his good fortune in having Fleur for a 
partner that he could hardly take his eyes off her. 
Cedric and Cho were close to Harry too; he looked 
away from them so he wouldn’t have to talk to them. 
His eyes fell instead on the girl next to Krum. His jaw 
dropped. 

It was Hermione. 



Page | 456 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But she didn’t look like Hermione at all. She had done 
something with her hair; it was no longer bushy but 
sleek and shiny, and twisted up into an elegant knot 
at the back of her head. She was wearing robes made 
of a floaty, periwinkle-blue material, and she was 
holding herself differently, somehow — or maybe it 
was merely the absence of the twenty or so books she 
usually had slung over her back. She was also 
smiling — rather nervously, it was true — but the 
reduction in the size of her front teeth was more 
noticeable than ever; Harry couldn’t understand how 
he hadn’t spotted it before. 

“Hi, Harry!” she said. “Hi, Parvati!” 

Parvati was gazing at Hermione in unflattering 
disbelief. She wasn’t the only one either; when the 
doors to the Great Hall opened, Krum’s fan club from 
the library stalked past, throwing Hermione looks of 
deepest loathing. Pansy Parkinson gaped at her as 
she walked by with Malfoy, and even he didn’t seem 
to be able to find an insult to throw at her. Ron, 
however, walked right past Hermione without looking 
at her. 

Once everyone else was settled in the Hall, Professor 
McGonagall told the champions and their partners to 
get in line in pairs and to follow her. They did so, and 
everyone in the Great Hall applauded as they entered 
and started walking up toward a large round table at 
the top of the Hall, where the judges were sitting. 

The walls of the Hall had all been covered in sparkling 
silver frost, with hundreds of garlands of mistletoe 
and ivy crossing the starry black ceiling. The House 
tables had vanished; instead, there were about a 
hundred smaller, lantern-lit ones, each seating about 
a dozen people. 



Page | 457 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry concentrated on not tripping over his feet. 
Parvati seemed to be enjoying herself; she was 
beaming around at everybody, steering Harry so 
forcefully that he felt as though he were a show dog 
she was putting through its paces. He caught sight of 
Ron and Padma as he neared the top table. Ron was 
watching Hermione pass with narrowed eyes. Padma 
was looking sulky. 

Dumbledore smiled happily as the champions 
approached the top table, but Karkaroff wore an 
expression remarkably like Ron’s as he watched 
Krum and Hermione draw nearer. Ludo Bagman, 
tonight in robes of bright purple with large yellow 
stars, was clapping as enthusiastically as any of the 
students; and Madame Maxime, who had changed 
her usual uniform of black satin for a flowing gown of 
lavender silk, was applauding them politely. But Mr. 
Crouch, Harry suddenly realized, was not there. The 
fifth seat at the table was occupied by Percy Weasley. 

When the champions and their partners reached the 
table, Percy drew out the empty chair beside him, 
staring pointedly at Harry. Harry took the hint and 
sat down next to Percy, who was wearing brand-new, 
navy-blue dress robes and an expression of such 
smugness that Harry thought it ought to be fined. 

“I’ve been promoted,” Percy said before Harry could 
even ask, and from his tone, he might have been 
announcing his election as supreme ruler of the 
universe. “I’m now Mr. Crouch’s personal assistant, 
and I’m here representing him.” 

“Why didn’t he come?” Harry asked. He wasn’t looking 
forward to being lectured on cauldron bottoms all 
through dinner. 



Page | 458 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




‘Tm afraid to say Mr. Crouch isn’t well, not well at all. 
Hasn’t been right since the World Cup. Hardly 
surprising — overwork. He’s not as young as he was 
— though still quite brilliant, of course, the mind 
remains as great as it ever was. But the World Cup 
was a fiasco for the whole Ministry, and then, Mr. 
Crouch suffered a huge personal shock with the 
misbehavior of that house-elf of his, Blinky, or 
whatever she was called. Naturally, he dismissed her 
immediately afterward, but — well, as I say, he’s 
getting on, he needs looking after, and I think he’s 
found a definite drop in his home comforts since she 
left. And then we had the tournament to arrange, and 
the aftermath of the Cup to deal with — that revolting 
Skeeter woman buzzing around — no, poor man, he’s 
having a well earned, quiet Christmas. I’m just glad 
he knew he had someone he could rely upon to take 
his place.” 

Harry wanted very much to ask whether Mr. Crouch 
had stopped calling Percy “Weatherby” yet, but 
resisted the temptation. 

There was no food as yet on the glittering golden 
plates, but small menus were lying in front of each of 
them. Harry picked his up uncertainly and looked 
around — there were no waiters. Dumbledore, 
however, looked carefully down at his own menu, 
then said very clearly to his plate, “Pork chops!” 

And pork chops appeared. Getting the idea, the rest of 
the table placed their orders with their plates too. 
Harry glanced up at Hermione to see how she felt 
about this new and more complicated method of 
dining — surely it meant plenty of extra work for the 
house-elves? — but for once, Hermione didn’t seem to 
be thinking about S.P.E.W. She was deep in talk with 
Viktor Krum and hardly seemed to notice what she 
was eating. 

Page | 459 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




It now occurred to Harry that he had never actually 
heard Krum speak before, but he was certainly 
talking now, and very enthusiastically at that. 

“Veil, ve have a castle also, not as big as this, nor as 
comfortable, I am thinking,” he was telling Hermione. 
“Ve have just four floors, and the fires are lit only for 
magical purposes. But ve have grounds larger even 
than these — though in vinter, ve have very little 
daylight, so ve are not enjoying them. But in summer 
ve are flying every day, over the lakes and the 
mountains — ” 

“Now, now, Viktor!” said Karkaroff with a laugh that 
didn’t reach his cold eyes, “don’t go giving away 
anything else, now, or your charming friend will know 
exactly where to find us!” 

Dumbledore smiled, his eyes twinkling. “Igor, all this 
secrecy ... one would almost think you didn’t want 
visitors.” 

“Well, Dumbledore,” said Karkaroff, displaying his 
yellowing teeth to their fullest extent, “we are all 
protective of our private domains, are we not? Do we 
not jealously guard the halls of learning that have 
been entrusted to us? Are we not right to be proud 
that we alone know our school’s secrets, and right to 
protect them?” 

“Oh I would never dream of assuming I know all 
Hogwarts’ secrets, Igor,” said Dumbledore amicably. 
“Only this morning, for instance, I took a wrong 
turning on the way to the bathroom and found myself 
in a beautifully proportioned room I have never seen 
before, containing a really rather magnificent 
collection of chamber pots. When I went back to 
investigate more closely, I discovered that the room 
had vanished. But I must keep an eye out for it. 

Page | 460 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Possibly it is only accessible at five-thirty in the 
morning. Or it may only appear at the quarter moon 
— or when the seeker has an exceptionally full 
bladder.” 

Harry snorted into his plate of goulash. Percy 
frowned, but Harry could have sworn Dumbledore 
had given him a very small wink. 

Meanwhile Fleur Delacour was criticizing the 
Hogwarts decorations to Roger Davies. 

“Zis is nothing,” she said dismissively, looking around 
at the sparkling walls of the Great Hall. “At ze Palace 
of Beauxbatons, we ’ave ice sculptures all around ze 
dining chamber at Chreestmas. Zey do not melt, of 
course . . . zey are like ’uge statues of diamond, 
glittering around ze place. And ze food is seemply 
superb. And we ’ave choirs of wood nymphs, ’oo 
serenade us as we eat. We ’ave none of zis ugly armor 
in ze ’alls, and eef a poltergeist ever entaired into 
Beauxbatons, ’e would be expelled like zat.” She 
slapped her hand onto the table impatiently. 

Roger Davies was watching her talk with a very dazed 
look on his face, and he kept missing his mouth with 
his fork. Harry had the impression that Davies was 
too busy staring at Fleur to take in a word she was 
saying. 

“Absolutely right,” he said quickly, slapping his own 
hand down on the table in imitation of Fleur. “Like 
that. Yeah.” 

Harry looked around the Hall. Hagrid was sitting at 
one of the other staff tables; he was back in his 
horrible hairy brown suit and gazing up at the top 
table. Harry saw him give a small wave, and looking 



Page | 461 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




around, saw Madame Maxime return it, her opals 
glittering in the candlelight. 

Hermione was now teaching Krum to say her name 
properly; he kept calling her “Hermy-own.” 

“Her-my-oh-nee,” she said slowly and clearly. 

“Herm-own-ninny.” 

“Close enough,” she said, catching Harry’s eye and 
grinning. 

When all the food had been consumed, Dumbledore 
stood up and asked the students to do the same. 

Then, with a wave of his wand, all the tables zoomed 
back along the walls leaving the floor clear, and then 
he conjured a raised platform into existence along the 
right wall. A set of drums, several guitars, a lute, a 
cello, and some bagpipes were set upon it. 

The Weird Sisters now trooped up onto the stage to 
wildly enthusiastic applause; they were all extremely 
hairy and dressed in black robes that had been 
artfully ripped and torn. They picked up their 
instruments, and Harry, who had been so interested 
in watching them that he had almost forgotten what 
was coming, suddenly realized that the lanterns on all 
the other tables had gone out, and that the other 
champions and their partners were standing up. 

“Come on!” Parvati hissed. “We’re supposed to dance!” 

Harry tripped over his dress robes as he stood up. 

The Weird Sisters struck up a slow, mournful tune; 
Harry walked onto the brightly lit dance floor, 
carefully avoiding catching anyone’s eye (he could see 
Seamus and Dean waving at him and sniggering), and 
next moment, Parvati had seized his hands, placed 
Page | 462 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




one around her waist, and was holding the other 
tightly in hers. 

It wasn’t as bad as it could have been, Harry thought, 
revolving slowly on the spot (Parvati was steering) . He 
kept his eyes fixed over the heads of the watching 
people, and very soon many of them too had come 
onto the dance floor, so that the champions were no 
longer the center of attention. Neville and Ginny were 
dancing nearby — he could see Ginny wincing 
frequently as Neville trod on her feet — and 
Dumbledore was waltzing with Madame Maxime. He 
was so dwarfed by her that the top of his pointed hat 
barely tickled her chin; however, she moved very 
gracefully for a woman so large. Mad-Eye Moody was 
doing an extremely ungainly two-step with Professor 
Sinistra, who was nervously avoiding his wooden leg. 

“Nice socks, Potter,” Moody growled as he passed, his 
magical eye staring through Harry’s robes. 

“Oh — yeah, Dobby the house-elf knitted them for 
me,” said Harry, grinning. 

“He is so creepy\” Parvati whispered as Moody 
clunked away. “I don’t think that eye should be 
allowed]” 

Harry heard the final, quavering note from the 
bagpipe with relief. The Weird Sisters stopped playing, 
applause filled the hall once more, and Harry let go of 
Parvati at once. 

“Let’s sit down, shall we?” 

“Oh — but — this is a really good one!” Parvati said 
as the Weird Sisters struck up a new song, which was 
much faster. 



Page | 463 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“No, I don’t like it,” Harry lied, and he led her away 
from the dance floor, past Fred and Angelina, who 
were dancing so exhuberantly that people around 
them were backing away in fear of injury, and over to 
the table where Ron and Padma were sitting. 

“How’s it going?” Harry asked Ron, sitting down and 
opening a bottle of butterbeer. 

Ron didn’t answer. He was glaring at Hermione and 
Krum, who were dancing nearby. Padma was sitting 
with her arms and legs crossed, one foot jiggling in 
time to the music. Every now and then she threw a 
disgruntled look at Ron, who was completely ignoring 
her. Parvati sat down on Harry’s other side, crossed 
her arms and legs too, and within minutes was asked 
to dance by a boy from Beauxbatons. 

“You don’t mind, do you, Harry?” Parvati said. 

“What?” said Harry, who was now watching Cho and 
Cedric. 

“Oh never mind,” snapped Parvati, and she went off 
with the boy from Beauxbatons. When the song 
ended, she did not return. 

Hermione came over and sat down in Parvati’s empty 
chair. She was a bit pink in the face from dancing. 

“Hi,” said Harry. Ron didn’t say anything. 

“It’s hot, isn’t it?” said Hermione, fanning herself with 
her hand. “Viktor’s just gone to get some drinks.” 

Ron gave her a withering look. “Viktor?” he said. 
“Hasn’t he asked you to call him Vicky yet?” 



Page | 464 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione looked at him in surprise. “What’s up with 
you?” she said. 

“If you don’t know,” said Ron scathingly, “I’m not 
going to tell you.” 

Hermione stared at him, then at Harry, who 
shrugged. 

“Ron, what — ?” 

“He’s from Durmstrang!” spat Ron. “He’s competing 
against Harry! Against Hogwarts! You — you’re — ” 
Ron was obviously casting around for words strong 
enough to describe Hermione ’s crime, “ fraternizing 
with the enemy, that’s what you’re doing!” 

Hermione’s mouth fell open. 

“Don’t be so stupid!” she said after a moment. “The 
enemy\ Honestly — who was the one who was all 
excited when they saw him arrive? Who was the one 
who wanted his autograph? Who’s got a model of him 
up in their dormitory?” 

Ron chose to ignore this. “I s’pose he asked you to 
come with him while you were both in the library?” 

“Yes, he did,” said Hermione, the pink patches on her 
cheeks glowing more brightly. “So what?” 

“What happened — trying to get him to join spew, 
were you?” 

“No, I wasn’t! If you really want to know, he — he said 
he’d been coming up to the library every day to try 
and talk to me, but he hadn’t been able to pluck up 
the courage!” 



Page | 465 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione said this very quickly, and blushed so 
deeply that she was the same color as Parvati’s robes. 

“Yeah, well — that’s his story,” said Ron nastily. 

“And what’s that supposed to mean?” 

“Obvious, isn’t it? He’s Karkaroff’s student, isn’t he? 
He knows who you hang around with. ... He’s just 
trying to get closer to Harry — get inside information 
on him — or get near enough to jinx him — ” 

Hermione looked as though Ron had slapped her. 
When she spoke, her voice quivered. 

“For your information, he hasn’t asked me one single 
thing about Harry, not one — ” 

Ron changed tack at the speed of light. 

“Then he’s hoping you’ll help him find out what his 
egg means! I suppose you’ve been putting your heads 
together during those cozy little library sessions — ” 

“I’d never help him work out that egg!” said Hermione, 
looking outraged. “Never. How could you say 
something like that — I want Harry to win the 
tournament, Harry knows that, don’t you, Harry?” 

“You’ve got a funny way of showing it,” sneered Ron. 

“This whole tournament’s supposed to be about 
getting to know foreign wizards and making friends 
with them!” said Hermione hotly. 

“No it isn’t!” shouted Ron. “It’s about winning!” 

People were starting to stare at them. 



Page | 466 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Ron,” said Harry quietly, “I haven’t got a problem 
with Hermione coming with Krum — ” 

But Ron ignored Harry too. 

“Why don’t you go and find Vicky, he’ll be wondering 
where you are,” said Ron. 

“Don’t call him Vickyl” 

Hermione jumped to her feet and stormed off across 
the dance floor, disappearing into the crowd. Ron 
watched her go with a mixture of anger and 
satisfaction on his face. 

“Are you going to ask me to dance at all?” Padma 
asked him. 

“No,” said Ron, still glaring after Hermione. 

“Fine,” snapped Padma, and she got up and went to 
join Parvati and the Beauxbatons boy, who conjured 
up one of his friends to join them so fast that Harry 
could have sworn he had zoomed him there by a 
Summoning Charm. 

“Vare is Herm-own-ninny?” said a voice. 

Krum had just arrived at their table clutching two 
butterbeers. 

“No idea,” said Ron mulishly, looking up at him. “Lost 
her, have you?” 

Krum was looking surly again. 

“Veil, if you see her, tell her I haff drinks,” he said, 
and he slouched off. 



Page | 467 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Made friends with Viktor Krum, have you, Ron?” 



Percy had bustled over, rubbing his hands together 
and looking extremely pompous. “Excellent! That’s 
the whole point, you know — international magical 
cooperation!” 

To Harry’s displeasure, Percy now took Padma’s 
vacated seat. The top table was now empty; Professor 
Dumbledore was dancing with Professor Sprout, Ludo 
Bagman with Professor McGonagall; Madame Maxime 
and Hagrid were cutting a wide path around the 
dance floor as they waltzed through the students, and 
Karkaroff was nowhere to be seen. When the next 
song ended, everybody applauded once more, and 
Harry saw Ludo Bagman kiss Professor McGonagall’s 
hand and make his way back through the crowds, at 
which point Fred and George accosted him. 

“What do they think they’re doing, annoying senior 
Ministry members?” Percy hissed, watching Fred and 
George suspiciously. “No respect ...” 

Ludo Bagman shook off Fred and George fairly 
quickly, however, and, spotting Harry, waved and 
came over to their table. 

“I hope my brothers weren’t bothering you, Mr. 
Bagman?” said Percy at once. 

“What? Oh not at all, not at all!” said Bagman. “No, 
they were just telling me a bit more about those fake 
wands of theirs. Wondering if I could advise them on 
the marketing. I’ve promised to put them in touch 
with a couple of contacts of mine at Zonko’s Joke 
Shop. ...” 

Percy didn’t look happy about this at all, and Harry 
was prepared to bet he would be rushing to tell Mrs. 

Page | 468 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Weasley about this the moment he got home. 
Apparently Fred and George’s plans had grown even 
more ambitious lately, if they were hoping to sell to 
the public. Bagman opened his mouth to ask Harry 
something, but Percy diverted him. 

“How do you feel the tournament’s going, Mr. 

Bagman? Our department’s quite satisfied — the 
hitch with the Goblet of Fire” — he glanced at Harry 
— “was a little unfortunate, of course, but it seems to 
have gone very smoothly since, don’t you think?” 

“Oh yes,” Bagman said cheerfully, “it’s all been 
enormous fun. How’s old Barty doing? Shame he 
couldn’t come.” 

“Oh I’m sure Mr. Crouch will be up and about in no 
time,” said Percy importantly, “but in the meantime, 
I’m more than willing to take up the slack. Of course, 
it’s not all attending balls” — he laughed airily — “oh 
no, I’ve had to deal with all sorts of things that have 
cropped up in his absence — you heard Ali Bashir 
was caught smuggling a consignment of flying carpets 
into the country? And then we’ve been trying to 
persuade the Transylvanians to sign the International 
Ban on Dueling. I’ve got a meeting with their Head of 
Magical Cooperation in the new year — ” 

“Let’s go for a walk,” Ron muttered to Harry, “get 
away from Percy. ...” 

Pretending they wanted more drinks, Harry and Ron 
left the table, edged around the dance floor, and 
slipped out into the entrance hall. The front doors 
stood open, and the fluttering fairy lights in the rose 
garden winked and twinkled as they went down the 
front steps, where they found themselves surrounded 
by bushes; winding, ornamental paths; and large 
stone statues. Harry could hear splashing water, 

Page | 469 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




which sounded like a fountain. Here and there, people 
were sitting on carved benches. He and Ron set off 
along one of the winding paths through the 
rosebushes, but they had gone only a short way when 
they heard an unpleasantly familiar voice. 

"... don’t see what there is to fuss about, Igor.” 

“Severus, you cannot pretend this isn’t happening!” 
Karkaroff’s voice sounded anxious and hushed, as 
though keen not to be overheard. “It’s been getting 
clearer and clearer for months. I am becoming 
seriously concerned, I can’t deny it — ” 

“Then flee,” said Snape’s voice curtly. “Flee — I will 
make your excuses. I, however, am remaining at 
Hogwarts.” 

Snape and Karkaroff came around the corner. Snape 
had his wand out and was blasting rosebushes apart, 
his expression most ill-natured. Squeals issued from 
many of the bushes, and dark shapes emerged from 
them. 

“Ten points from Ravenclaw, Fawcett!” Snape snarled 
as a girl ran past him. “And ten points from Hufflepuff 
too, Stebbins!” as a boy went rushing after her. “And 
what are you two doing?” he added, catching sight of 
Harry and Ron on the path ahead. Karkaroff, Harry 
saw, looked slightly discomposed to see them 
standing there. His hand went nervously to his 
goatee, and he began winding it around his finger. 

“We’re walking,” Ron told Snape shortly. “Not against 
the law, is it?” 

“Keep walking, then!” Snape snarled, and he brushed 
past them, his long black cloak billowing out behind 



Page | 470 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




him. Karkaroff hurried away after Snape. Harry and 
Ron continued down the path. 

“What’s got Karkaroff all worried?” Ron muttered. 

“And since when have he and Snape been on first- 
name terms?” said Harry slowly. 

They had reached a large stone reindeer now, over 
which they could see the sparkling jets of a tall 
fountain. The shadowy outlines of two enormous 
people were visible on a stone bench, watching the 
water in the moonlight. And then Harry heard Hagrid 
speak. 

“Momen’ I saw yeh, I knew,” he was saying, in an 
oddly husky voice. 

Harry and Ron froze. This didn’t sound like the sort of 
scene they ought to walk in on, somehow. . . . Harry 
looked around, back up the path, and saw Fleur 
Delacour and Roger Davies standing half-concealed in 
a rosebush nearby. He tapped Ron on the shoulder 
and jerked his head toward them, meaning that they 
could easily sneak off that way without being noticed 
(Fleur and Davies looked very busy to Harry), but 
Ron, eyes widening in horror at the sight of Fleur, 
shook his head vigorously, and pulled Harry deeper 
into the shadows behind the reindeer. 

“What did you know, ’Agrid?” said Madame Maxime, a 
purr in her low voice. 

Harry definitely didn’t want to listen to this; he knew 
Hagrid would hate to be overheard in a situation like 
this (he certainly would have) — if it had been 
possible he would have put his fingers in his ears and 
hummed loudly, but that wasn’t really an option. 
Instead he tried to interest himself in a beetle 
Page | 471 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




crawling along the stone reindeer’s back, but the 
beetle just wasn’t interesting enough to block out 
Hagrid’s next words. 

“I jus’ knew ... knew you were like me. ... Was it yer 
mother or yer father?” 

“I — I don’t know what you mean, ’Agrid. ...” 

“It was my mother,” said Hagrid quietly. “She was one 
o’ the las’ ones in Britain. ’Course, I can’ remember 
her too well ... she left, see. When I was abou’ three. 
She wasn’ really the maternal sort. Well ... it’s not in 
their natures, is it? Dunno what happened to her ... 
might be dead fer all I know. ...” 

Madame Maxime didn’t say anything. And Harry, in 
spite of himself, took his eyes off the beetle and 
looked over the top of the reindeer’s antlers, listening. 

. . . He had never heard Hagrid talk about his 
childhood before. 

“Me dad was broken-hearted when she wen’. Tiny 
little bloke, my dad was. By the time I was six I could 
lift him up an’ put him on top o’ the dresser if he 
annoyed me. Used ter make him laugh. ...” Hagrid’s 
deep voice broke. Madame Maxime was listening, 
motionless, apparently staring at the silvery fountain. 
“Dad raised me ... but he died, o’ course, jus’ after I 
started school. Sorta had ter make me own way after 
that. Dumbledore was a real help, mind. Very kind ter 
me, he was. ...” 

Hagrid pulled out a large spotted silk handkerchief 
and blew his nose heavily. 

“So ... anyway ... enough abou’ me. What about you? 
Which side you got it on?” 



Page | 472 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But Madame Maxime had suddenly got to her feet. 

“It is chilly,” she said — but whatever the weather 
was doing, it was nowhere near as cold as her voice. 

“I think I will go in now.” 

“Eh?” said Hagrid blankly. “No, don’ go! I’ve — I’ve 
never met another one before!” 

“Anuzzer what, precisely?” said Madame Maxime, her 
tone icy. 

Harry could have told Hagrid it was best not to 
answer; he stood there in the shadows gritting his 
teeth, hoping against hope he wouldn’t — but it was 
no good. 

“Another half-giant, o’ course!” said Hagrid. 

“ ’Ow dare you!” shrieked Madame Maxime. Her voice 
exploded through the peaceful night air like a 
foghorn; behind him, Harry heard Fleur and Roger fall 
out of their rosebush. “I ’ave nevair been more 
insulted in my life! ’Alf-giant? Moi? I ’ave — I ’ave big 
bones!” 

She stormed away; great multicolored swarms of 
fairies rose into the air as she passed, angrily pushing 
aside bushes. Hagrid was still sitting on the bench, 
staring after her. It was much too dark to make out 
his expression. Then, after about a minute, he stood 
up and strode away, not back to the castle, but off 
out into the dark grounds in the direction of his 
cabin. 

“C’mon,” Harry said, very quietly to Ron. “Let’s go. ...” 
But Ron didn’t move. 



Page | 473 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What’s up?” said Harry, looking at him. 

Ron looked around at Harry, his expression very 
serious indeed. 

“Did you know?” he whispered. “About Hagrid being 
half-giant?” 

“No,” Harry said, shrugging. “So what?” 

He knew immediately, from the look Ron was giving 
him, that he was once again revealing his ignorance 
of the wizarding world. Brought up by the Dursleys, 
there were many things that wizards took for granted 
that were revelations to Harry, but these surprises 
had become fewer with each successive year. Now, 
however, he could tell that most wizards would not 
have said “So what?” upon finding out that one of 
their friends had a giantess for a mother. 

“I’ll explain inside,” said Ron quietly, “c’mon. ...” 

Fleur and Roger Davies had disappeared, probably 
into a more private clump of bushes. Harry and Ron 
returned to the Great Hall. Parvati and Padma were 
now sitting at a distant table with a whole crowd of 
Beauxbatons boys, and Hermione was once more 
dancing with Krum. Harry and Ron sat down at a 
table far removed from the dance floor. 

“So?” Harry prompted Ron. “What’s the problem with 
giants?” 

“Well, they’re ... they’re ...” Ron struggled for words. 
"... not very nice,” he finished lamely. 

“Who cares?” Harry said. “There’s nothing wrong with 
Hagrid!” 



Page | 474 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I know there isn’t, but ... blimey, no wonder he keeps 
it quiet,” Ron said, shaking his head. “I always 
thought he’d got in the way of a bad Engorgement 
Charm when he was a kid or something. Didn’t like to 
mention it. ...” 

“But what’s it matter if his mother was a giantess?” 
said Harry. 

“Well ... no one who knows him will care, ’cos they’ll 
know he’s not dangerous,” said Ron slowly. “But ... 
Harry, they’re just vicious, giants. It’s like Hagrid 
said, it’s in their natures, they’re like trolls ... they 
just like killing, everyone knows that. There aren’t 
any left in Britain now, though.” 

“What happened to them?” 

“Well, they were dying out anyway, and then loads got 
themselves killed by Aurors. There ’re supposed to be 
giants abroad, though. ... They hide out in mountains 
mostly. ...” 

“I don’t know who Maxime thinks she’s kidding,” 

Harry said, watching Madame Maxime sitting alone at 
the judges’ table, looking very somber. “If Hagrid ’s 
half-giant, she definitely is. Big bones ... the only 
thing that’s got bigger bones than her is a dinosaur.” 

Harry and Ron spent the rest of the ball discussing 
giants in their corner, neither of them having any 
inclination to dance. Harry tried not to watch Cho 
and Cedric too much; it gave him a strong desire to 
kick something. 

When the Weird Sisters finished playing at midnight, 
everyone gave them a last, loud round of applause 
and started to wend their way into the entrance hall. 
Many people were expressing the wish that the ball 

Page | 475 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




could have gone on longer, but Harry was perfectly 
happy to be going to bed; as far as he was concerned, 
the evening hadn’t been much fun. 

Out in the entrance hall, Harry and Ron saw 
Hermione saying good night to Krum before he went 
back to the Durmstrang ship. She gave Ron a very 
cold look and swept past him up the marble staircase 
without speaking. Harry and Ron followed her, but 
halfway up the staircase Harry heard someone calling 
him. 

“Hey — Harry!” 

It was Cedric Diggory. Harry could see Cho waiting for 
him in the entrance hall below. 

“Yeah?” said Harry coldly as Cedric ran up the stairs 
toward him. 

Cedric looked as though he didn’t want to say 
whatever it was in front of Ron, who shrugged, 
looking bad-tempered, and continued to climb the 
stairs. 

“Listen ...” Cedric lowered his voice as Ron 
disappeared. “I owe you one for telling me about the 
dragons. You know that golden egg? Does yours wail 
when you open it?” 

“Yeah,” said Harry. 

“Well ... take a bath, okay?” 

“What?” 

“Take a bath, and — er — take the egg with you, and 
— er — just mull things over in the hot water. It’ll 
help you think. ... Trust me.” 

Page | 476 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry stared at him. 

“Tell you what,” Cedric said, “use the prefects’ 
bathroom. Fourth door to the left of that statue of 
Boris the Bewildered on the fifth floor. Password’s 
‘pine fresh. ’ Gotta go . . . want to say good night — ” 

He grinned at Harry again and hurried back down the 
stairs to Cho. 

Harry walked back to Gryffindor Tower alone. That 
had been extremely strange advice. Why would a bath 
help him to work out what the wailing egg meant? 
Was Cedric pulling his leg? Was he trying to make 
Harry look like a fool, so Cho would like him even 
more by comparison? 

The Fat Lady and her friend Vi were snoozing in the 
picture over the portrait hole. Harry had to yell “Fairy 
lights!” before he woke them up, and when he did, 
they were extremely irritated. He climbed into the 
common room and found Ron and Hermione having a 
blazing row. Standing ten feet apart, they were 
bellowing at each other, each scarlet in the face. 

“Well, if you don’t like it, you know what the solution 
is, don’t you?” yelled Hermione; her hair was coming 
down out of its elegant bun now, and her face was 
screwed up in anger. 

“Oh yeah?” Ron yelled back. “What’s that?” 

“Next time there’s a ball, ask me before someone else 
does, and not as a last resort!” 

Ron mouthed soundlessly like a goldfish out of water 
as Hermione turned on her heel and stormed up the 
girls’ staircase to bed. Ron turned to look at Harry. 



Page | 477 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Well,” he sputtered, looking thunderstruck, “well — 
that just proves — completely missed the point — ” 

Harry didn’t say anything. He liked being back on 
speaking terms with Ron too much to speak his mind 
right now — but he somehow thought that Hermione 
had gotten the point much better than Ron had. 



Page | 478 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






RITA SKEBTER’S SCOOP 

Everybody got up late on Boxing Day. The Gryffindor 
common room was much quieter than it had been 
lately, many yawns punctuating the lazy 
conversations. Hermione’s hair was bushy again; she 
confessed to Harry that she had used liberal amounts 
of Sleekeazy’s Hair Potion on it for the ball, “but it’s 
way too much bother to do every day,” she said 
matter-of-factly, scratching a purring Crookshanks 
behind the ears. 

Ron and Hermione seemed to have reached an 
unspoken agreement not to discuss their argument. 
They were being quite friendly to each other, though 
oddly formal. Ron and Harry wasted no time in telling 
Hermione about the conversation they had overheard 
between Madame Maxime and Hagrid, but Hermione 
didn’t seem to find the news that Hagrid was a half- 
giant nearly as shocking as Ron did. 

“Well, I thought he must be,” she said, shrugging. “I 
knew he couldn’t be pure giant because they’re about 
twenty feet tall. But honestly, all this hysteria about 

Page | 479 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




giants. They can’t all be horrible. ... It’s the same sort 
of prejudice that people have toward werewolves. ... 

It’s just bigotry, isn’t it?” 

Ron looked as though he would have liked to reply 
scathingly, but perhaps he didn’t want another row, 
because he contented himself with shaking his head 
disbelievingly while Hermione wasn’t looking. 

It was time now to think of the homework they had 
neglected during the first week of the holidays. 
Everybody seemed to be feeling rather flat now that 
Christmas was over — everybody except Harry, that 
is, who was starting (once again) to feel slightly 
nervous. 

The trouble was that February the twenty-fourth 
looked a lot closer from this side of Christmas, and he 
still hadn’t done anything about working out the clue 
inside the golden egg. He therefore started taking the 
egg out of his trunk every time he went up to the 
dormitory, opening it, and listening intently, hoping 
that this time it would make some sense. He strained 
to think what the sound reminded him of, apart from 
thirty musical saws, but he had never heard anything 
else like it. He closed the egg, shook it vigorously, and 
opened it again to see if the sound had changed, but 
it hadn’t. He tried asking the egg questions, shouting 
over all the wailing, but nothing happened. He even 
threw the egg across the room — though he hadn’t 
really expected that to help. 

Harry had not forgotten the hint that Cedric had 
given him, but his less-than-friendly feelings toward 
Cedric just now meant that he was keen not to take 
his help if he could avoid it. In any case, it seemed to 
him that if Cedric had really wanted to give Harry a 
hand, he would have been a lot more explicit. He, 
Harry, had told Cedric exactly what was coming in 
Page | 480 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the first task — and Cedric’s idea of a fair exchange 
had been to tell Harry to take a bath. Well, he didn’t 
need that sort of rubbishy help — not from someone 
who kept walking down corridors hand in hand with 
Cho, anyway. And so the first day of the new term 
arrived, and Harry set off to lessons, weighed down 
with books, parchment, and quills as usual, but also 
with the lurking worry of the egg heavy in his 
stomach, as though he were carrying that around 
with him too. 

Snow was still thick upon the grounds, and the 
greenhouse windows were covered in condensation so 
thick that they couldn’t see out of them in Herbology. 
Nobody was looking forward to Care of Magical 
Creatures much in this weather, though as Ron said, 
the skrewts would probably warm them up nicely, 
either by chasing them, or blasting off so forcefully 
that Hagrid’s cabin would catch fire. 

When they arrived at Hagrid’s cabin, however, they 
found an elderly witch with closely cropped gray hair 
and a very prominent chin standing before his front 
door. 

“Hurry up, now, the bell rang five minutes ago,” she 
barked at them as they struggled toward her through 
the snow. 

“Who ’re you?” said Ron, staring at her. “Where’s 
Hagrid?” 

“My name is Professor Grubbly-Plank,” she said 
briskly. “I am your temporary Care of Magical 
Creatures teacher.” 

“Where’s Hagrid?” Harry repeated loudly. 



Page | 481 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“He is indisposed,” said Professor Grubbly-Plank 
shortly. 

Soft and unpleasant laughter reached Harry’s ears. 

He turned; Draco Malfoy and the rest of the 
Slytherins were joining the class. All of them looked 
gleeful, and none of them looked surprised to see 
Professor Grubbly-Plank. 

“This way, please,” said Professor Grubbly-Plank, and 
she strode off around the paddock where the 
Beauxbatons horses were shivering. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione followed her, looking back over their 
shoulders at Hagrid’s cabin. All the curtains were 
closed. Was Hagrid in there, alone and ill? 

“What’s wrong with Hagrid?” Harry said, hurrying to 
catch up with Professor Grubbly-Plank. 

“Never you mind,” she said as though she thought he 
was being nosy. 

“I do mind, though,” said Harry hotly. “What’s up with 
him?” 

Professor Grubbly-Plank acted as though she couldn’t 
hear him. She led them past the paddock where the 
huge Beauxbatons horses were standing, huddled 
against the cold, and toward a tree on the edge of the 
forest, where a large and beautiful unicorn was 
tethered. 

Many of the girls “ooooohed!” at the sight of the 
unicorn. 

“Oh it’s so beautiful!” whispered Lavender Brown. 
“How did she get it? They’re supposed to be really 
hard to catch!” 



Page | 482 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The unicorn was so brightly white it made the snow 
all around look gray. It was pawing the ground 
nervously with its golden hooves and throwing back 
its horned head. 

“Boys keep back!” barked Professor Grubbly-Plank, 
throwing out an arm and catching Harry hard in the 
chest. “They prefer the woman’s touch, unicorns. 
Girls to the front, and approach with care, come on, 
easy does it. ...” 

She and the girls walked slowly forward toward the 
unicorn, leaving the boys standing near the paddock 
fence, watching. The moment Professor Grubbly- 
Plank was out of earshot, Harry turned to Ron. 

“What d’you reckon’s wrong with him? You don’t 
think a skrewt — ?” 

“Oh he hasn’t been attacked, Potter, if that’s what 
you’re thinking,” said Malfoy softly. “No, he’s just too 
ashamed to show his big, ugly face.” 

“What d’you mean?” said Harry sharply. 

Malfoy put his hand inside the pocket of his robes 
and pulled out a folded page of newsprint. 

“There you go,” he said. “Hate to break it to you, 
Potter. ...” 

He smirked as Harry snatched the page, unfolded it, 
and read it, with Ron, Seamus, Dean, and Neville 
looking over his shoulder. It was an article topped 
with a picture of Hagrid looking extremely shifty. 

DUMBLEDORE’S GIANT MISTAKE 



Page | 483 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Albus Dumbledore, eccentric Headmaster of Hogwarts 
School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, has never been 
afraid to make controversial staff appointments, writes 
Rita Skeeter, Special Correspondent. In September of 
this year, he hired Alastor “Mad-Eye” Moody, the 
notoriously jinx-happy ex-Auror, to teach Defense 
Against the Dark Arts, a decision that caused many 
raised eyebrows at the Ministry of Magic, given 
Moody’s well-known habit of attacking anybody who 
makes a sudden movement in his presence. Mad-Eye 
Moody, however, looks responsible and kindly when 
set beside the part-human Dumbledore employs to 
teach Care of Magical Creatures. 

Rubeus Hagrid, who admits to being expelled from 
Hogwarts in his third year, has enjoyed the position of 
gamekeeper at the school ever since, a job secured for 
him by Dumbledore. Last year, however, Hagrid used 
his mysterious influence over the headmaster to 
secure the additional post of Care of Magical 
Creatures teacher, over the heads of many better- 
qualified candidates. 

An alarmingly large and ferocious-looking man, 

Hagrid has been using his newfound authority to 
terrify the students in his care with a succession of 
horrific creatures. While Dumbledore turns a blind 
eye, Hagrid has maimed several pupils during a series 
of lessons that many admit to being “very 
frightening.” 

“I was attacked by a hippogriff, and my friend Vincent 
Crabbe got a bad bite off a flobberworm,” says Draco 
Malfoy, a fourth-year student. “We all hate Hagrid, 
but we’re just too scared to say anything.” 

Hagrid has no intention of ceasing his campaign of 
intimidation, however. In conversation with a Daily 
Prophet reporter last month, he admitted breeding 

Page | 484 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




creatures he has dubbed “Blast-Ended Skrewts, ” 
highly dangerous crosses between manticores and fire- 
crabs. The creation of new breeds of magical creature 
is, of course, an activity usually closely observed by 
the Department for the Regulation and Control of 
Magical Creatures. Hagrid, however, considers himself 
to be above such petty restrictions. 

“I was just having some fun,” he says, before hastily 
changing the subject. 

As if this were not enough, the Daily Prophet has now 
unearthed evidence that Hagrid is not — as he has 
always pretended — a pure-blood wizard. He is not, in 
fact, even pure human. His mother, we can exclusively 
reveal, is none other than the giantess Fridwulfa, 
whose whereabouts are currently unknown. 

Bloodthirsty and brutal, the giants brought 
themselves to the point of extinction by warring 
amongst themselves during the last century. The 
handful that remained joined the ranks of He-Who- 
Must-Not-Be-Named, and were responsible for some 
of the worst mass Muggle killings of his reign of 
terror. 

While many of the giants who served He-Who-Must- 
Not-Be-Named were killed by Aurors working against 
the Dark Side, Fridwulfa was not among them. It is 
possible she escaped to one of the giant communities 
still existing in foreign mountain ranges. If his antics 
during Care of Magical Creatures lessons are any 
guide, however, Fridwulfa’s son appears to have 
inherited her brutal nature. 

In a bizarre twist, Hagrid is reputed to have developed 
a close friendship with the boy who brought around 
You-Know- Who’s fall from power — thereby driving 
Hagrid ’s own mother, like the rest of You-Know- Who’s 

Page | 485 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




supporters, into hiding. Perhaps Harry Potter is 
unaware of the unpleasant truth about his large 
friend — but Albus Dumbledore surely has a duty to 
ensure that Harry Potter, along with his fellow 
students, is warned about the dangers of associating 
with part-giants. 



Harry finished reading and looked up at Ron, whose 
mouth was hanging open. 

“How did she find out?” he whispered. 

But that wasn’t what was bothering Harry. 

“What d’you mean, “we all hate Hagrid’?” Harry spat 
at Malfoy. “What’s this rubbish about him” — he 
pointed at Crabbe — “getting a bad bite off a 
flobberworm? They haven’t even got teeth!” 

Crabbe was sniggering, apparently very pleased with 
himself. 

“Well, I think this should put an end to the oaf’s 
teaching career,” said Malfoy, his eyes glinting. “Half- 
giant ... and there was me thinking he’d just 
swallowed a bottle of Skele-Gro when he was young. 

... None of the mummies and daddies are going to like 
this at all. ... They’ll be worried he’ll eat their kids, ha, 
ha. ...” 

“You — ” 

“Are you paying attention over there?” 

Professor Grubbly-Plank’s voice carried over to the 
boys; the girls were all clustered around the unicorn 
now, stroking it. Harry was so angry that the Daily 

Page |486 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Prophet article shook in his hands as he turned to 
stare unseeingly at the unicorn, whose many magical 
properties Professor Grubbly-Plank was now 
enumerating in a loud voice, so that the boys could 
hear too. 

“I hope she stays, that woman!” said Parvati Patil 
when the lesson had ended and they were all heading 
back to the castle for lunch. “That’s more what I 
thought Care of Magical Creatures would be like . . . 
proper creatures like unicorns, not monsters. ...” 

“What about Hagrid?” Harry said angrily as they went 
up the steps. 

“What about him?” said Parvati in a hard voice. “He 
can still be gamekeeper, can’t he?” 

Parvati had been very cool toward Harry since the 
ball. He supposed that he ought to have paid her a bit 
more attention, but she seemed to have had a good 
time all the same. She was certainly telling anybody 
who would listen that she had made arrangements to 
meet the boy from Beauxbatons in Hogsmeade on the 
next weekend trip. 

“That was a really good lesson,” said Hermione as 
they entered the Great Hall. “I didn’t know half the 
things Professor Grubbly-Plank told us about uni — ” 

“Look at this!” Harry snarled, and he shoved the Daily 
Prophet article under Hermione ’s nose. 

Hermione ’s mouth fell open as she read. Her reaction 
was exactly the same as Ron’s. 

“How did that horrible Skeeter woman find out? You 
don’t think Hagrid told her?” 



Page | 487 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“No,” said Harry, leading the way over to the 
Gryffindor table and throwing himself into a chair, 
furious. “He never even told us, did he? I reckon she 
was so mad he wouldn’t give her loads of horrible 
stuff about me, she went ferreting around to get him 
back.” 

“Maybe she heard him telling Madame Maxime at the 
ball,” said Hermione quietly. 

“We’d have seen her in the garden!” said Ron. 
“Anyway, she’s not supposed to come into school 
anymore, Hagrid said Dumbledore banned her. ...” 

“Maybe she’s got an Invisibility Cloak,” said Harry, 
ladling chicken casserole onto his plate and splashing 
it everywhere in his anger. “Sort of thing she’d do, 
isn’t it, hide in bushes listening to people.” 

“Like you and Ron did, you mean,” said Hermione. 

“We weren’t trying to hear him!” said Ron indignantly. 
“We didn’t have any choice! The stupid prat, talking 
about his giantess mother where anyone could have 
heard him!” 

“We’ve got to go and see him,” said Harry. “This 
evening, after Divination. Tell him we want him back 
... you do want him back?” he shot at Hermione. 

“I — well, I’m not going to pretend it didn’t make a 
nice change, having a proper Care of Magical 
Creatures lesson for once — but I do want Hagrid 
back, of course I do!” Hermione added hastily, 
quailing under Harry’s furious stare. 

So that evening after dinner, the three of them left the 
castle once more and went down through the frozen 



Page | 488 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




grounds to Hagrid’s cabin. They knocked, and Fang’s 
booming barks answered. 

“Hagrid, it’s us!” Harry shouted, pounding on the 
door. “Open up! 

Hagrid didn’t answer. They could hear Fang 
scratching at the door, whining, but it didn’t open. 
They hammered on it for ten more minutes; Ron even 
went and banged on one of the windows, but there 
was no response. 

“What’s he avoiding us for?” Hermione said when they 
had finally given up and were walking back to the 
school. “He surely doesn’t think we’d care about him 
being half-giant?” 

But it seemed that Hagrid did care. They didn’t see a 
sign of him all week. He didn’t appear at the staff 
table at mealtimes, they didn’t see him going about 
his gamekeeper duties on the grounds, and Professor 
Grubbly-Plank continued to take the Care of Magical 
Creatures classes. Malfoy was gloating at every 
possible opportunity. 

“Missing your half-breed pal?” he kept whispering to 
Harry whenever there was a teacher around, so that 
he was safe from Harry’s retaliation. “Missing the 
elephant-man?” 

There was a Hogsmeade visit halfway through 
January. Hermione was very surprised that Harry 
was going to go. 

“I just thought you’d want to take advantage of the 
common room being quiet,” she said. “Really get to 
work on that egg.” 



Page | 489 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh I — I reckon I’ve got a pretty good idea what it’s 
about now,” Harry lied. 

“Have you really?” said Hermione, looking impressed. 
“Well done!” 

Harry’s insides gave a guilty squirm, but he ignored 
them. He still had five weeks to work out that egg 
clue, after all, and that was ages ... whereas if he 
went into Hogsmeade, he might run into Hagrid, and 
get a chance to persuade him to come back. 

He, Ron, and Hermione left the castle together on 
Saturday and set off through the cold, wet grounds 
toward the gates. As they passed the Durmstrang 
ship moored in the lake, they saw Viktor Krum 
emerge onto the deck, dressed in nothing but 
swimming trunks. He was very skinny indeed, but 
apparently a lot tougher than he looked, because he 
climbed up onto the side of the ship, stretched out his 
arms, and dived, right into the lake. 

“He’s mad!” said Harry, staring at Krum’s dark head 
as it bobbed out into the middle of the lake. “It must 
be freezing, it’s January!” 

“It’s a lot colder where he comes from,” said 
Hermione. “I suppose it feels quite warm to him.” 

“Yeah, but there’s still the giant squid,” said Ron. He 
didn’t sound anxious — if anything, he sounded 
hopeful. Hermione noticed his tone of voice and 
frowned. 

“He’s really nice, you know,” she said. “He’s not at all 
like you’d think, coming from Durmstrang. He likes it 
much better here, he told me.” 



Page | 490 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Ron said nothing. He hadn’t mentioned Viktor Krum 
since the ball, but Harry had found a miniature arm 
under his bed on Boxing Day, which had looked very 
much as though it had been snapped off a small 
model figure wearing Bulgarian Quidditch robes. 

Harry kept his eyes skinned for a sign of Hagrid all 
the way down the slushy High Street, and suggested a 
visit to the Three Broomsticks once he had 
ascertained that Hagrid was not in any of the shops. 

The pub was as crowded as ever, but one quick look 
around at all the tables told Harry that Hagrid wasn’t 
there. Heart sinking, he went up to the bar with Ron 
and Hermione, ordered three butter-beers from 
Madam Rosmerta, and thought gloomily that he 
might just as well have stayed behind and listened to 
the egg wailing after all. 

“Doesn’t he ever go into the office?” Hermione 
whispered suddenly. “Look!” 

She pointed into the mirror behind the bar, and Harry 
saw Ludo Bagman reflected there, sitting in a 
shadowy corner with a bunch of goblins. Bagman was 
talking very fast in a low voice to the goblins, all of 
whom had their arms crossed and were looking rather 
menacing. 

It was indeed odd, Harry thought, that Bagman was 
here at the Three Broomsticks on a weekend when 
there was no Triwizard event, and therefore no 
judging to be done. He watched Bagman in the 
mirror. He was looking strained again, quite as 
strained as he had that night in the forest before the 
Dark Mark had appeared. But just then Bagman 
glanced over at the bar, saw Harry, and stood up. 



Page | 491 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“In a moment, in a moment!” Harry heard him say 
brusquely to the goblins, and Bagman hurried 
through the pub toward Harry, his boyish grin back 
in place. 

“Harry!” he said. “How are you? Been hoping to run 
into you! Everything going all right?” 

“Fine, thanks,” said Harry. 

“Wonder if I could have a quick, private word, Harry?” 
said Bagman eagerly. “You couldn’t give us a 
moment, you two, could you?” 

“Er — okay,” said Ron, and he and Hermione went off 
to find a table. 

Bagman led Harry along the bar to the end furthest 
from Madam Rosmerta. 

“Well, I just thought I’d congratulate you again on 
your splendid performance against that Horntail, 
Harry,” said Bagman. “Really superb.” 

“Thanks,” said Harry, but he knew this couldn’t be all 
that Bagman wanted to say, because he could have 
congratulated Harry in front of Ron and Hermione. 
Bagman didn’t seem in any particular rush to spill 
the beans, though. Harry saw him glance into the 
mirror over the bar at the goblins, who were all 
watching him and Harry in silence through their 
dark, slanting eyes. 

“Absolute nightmare,” said Bagman to Harry in an 
undertone, noticing Harry watching the goblins too. 
“Their English isn’t too good ... it’s like being back 
with all the Bulgarians at the Quidditch World Cup ... 
but at least they used sign language another human 
could recognize. This lot keep gabbling in 
Page | 492 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Gobbledegook . . . and I only know one word of 
Gobbledegook. Bladvak. It means ‘pickax.’ I don’t like 
to use it in case they think I’m threatening them.” 

He gave a short, booming laugh. 

“What do they want?” Harry said, noticing how the 
goblins were still watching Bagman very closely. 

“Er — well ...” said Bagman, looking suddenly 
nervous. “They ... er ... they’re looking for Barry 
Crouch.” 

“Why are they looking for him here?” said Harry. “He’s 
at the Ministry in London, isn’t he?” 

“Er ... as a matter of fact, I’ve no idea where he is,” 
said Bagman. “He’s sort of ... stopped coming to work. 
Been absent for a couple of weeks now. Young Percy, 
his assistant, says he’s ill. Apparently he’s just been 
sending instructions in by owl. But would you mind 
not mentioning that to anyone, Harry? Because Rita 
Skeeter’s still poking around everywhere she can, and 
I’m willing to bet she’d work up Barty’s illness into 
something sinister. Probably say he’s gone missing 
like Bertha Jorkins.” 

“Have you heard anything about Bertha Jorkins?” 
Harry asked. 

“No,” said Bagman, looking strained again. “I’ve got 
people looking, of course ...” (About time, thought 
Harry) “and it’s all very strange. She definitely arrived 
in Albania, because she met her second cousin there. 
And then she left the cousin’s house to go south and 
see an aunt . . . and she seems to have vanished 
without trace en route. Blowed if I can see where 
she’s got to ... she doesn’t seem the type to elope, for 
instance ... but still. ... What are we doing, talking 
Page | 493 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




about goblins and Bertha Jorkins? I really wanted to 
ask you” — he lowered his voice — “how are you 
getting on with your golden egg?” 

“Er ... not bad,” Harry said untruthfully. 

Bagman seemed to know he wasn’t being honest. 

“Listen, Harry,” he said (still in a very low voice), “I 
feel very bad about all this . . . you were thrown into 
this tournament, you didn’t volunteer for it... and if 
...” (his voice was so quiet now, Harry had to lean 
closer to listen) “if I can help at all ... a prod in the 
right direction ... I’ve taken a liking to you ... the way 
you got past that dragon! ... well, just say the word.” 

Harry stared up into Bagman’s round, rosy face and 
his wide, baby-blue eyes. 

“We’re supposed to work out the clues alone, aren’t 
we?” he said, careful to keep his voice casual and not 
sound as though he was accusing the head of the 
Department of Magical Games and Sports of breaking 
the rules. 

“Well ... well, yes,” said Bagman impatiently, “but — 
come on, Harry — we all want a Hogwarts victory, 
don’t we?” 

“Have you offered Cedric help?” Harry said. 

The smallest of frowns creased Bagman’s smooth 
face. “No, I haven’t,” he said. “I — well, like I say, I’ve 
taken a liking to you. Just thought I’d offer ...” 

“Well, thanks,” said Harry, “but I think I’m nearly 
there with the egg . . . couple more days should crack 
it.” 



Page | 494 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He wasn’t entirely sure why he was refusing 
Bagman’s help, except that Bagman was almost a 
stranger to him, and accepting his assistance would 
feel somehow much more like cheating than asking 
advice from Ron, Hermione, or Sirius. 

Bagman looked almost affronted, but couldn’t say 
much more as Fred and George turned up at that 
point. 

“Hello, Mr. Bagman,” said Fred brightly. “Can we buy 
you a drink?” 

“Er ... no,” said Bagman, with a last disappointed 
glance at Harry, “no, thank you, boys ...” 

Fred and George looked quite as disappointed as 
Bagman, who was surveying Harry as though he had 
let him down badly. 

“Well, I must dash,” he said. “Nice seeing you all. 

Good luck, Harry.” 

He hurried out of the pub. The goblins all slid off their 
chairs and exited after him. Harry went to rejoin Ron 
and Hermione. 

“What did he want?” Ron said, the moment Harry had 
sat down. 

“He offered to help me with the golden egg,” said 
Harry. 

“He shouldn’t be doing that!” said Hermione, looking 
very shocked. “He’s one of the judges! And anyway, 
you’ve already worked it out — haven’t you?” 

“Er ... nearly,” said Harry. 



Page | 495 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, I don’t think Dumbledore would like it if he 
knew Bagman was trying to persuade you to cheat!” 
said Hermione, still looking deeply disapproving. “I 
hope he’s trying to help Cedric as much!” 

“He’s not, I asked,” said Harry. 

“Who cares if Diggory’s getting help?” said Ron. Harry 
privately agreed. 

“Those goblins didn’t look very friendly,” said 
Hermione, sipping her butterbeer. “What were they 
doing here?” 

“Looking for Crouch, according to Bagman,” said 
Harry. “He’s still ill. Hasn’t been into work.” 

“Maybe Percy’s poisoning him,” said Ron. “Probably 
thinks if Crouch snuffs it he’ll be made head of the 
Department of International Magical Cooperation.” 

Hermione gave Ron a don’t -joke-about-things-like- 
that look, and said, “Funny, goblins looking for Mr. 
Crouch. . . . They’d normally deal with the Department 
for the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures.” 

“Crouch can speak loads of different languages, 
though,” said Harry. “Maybe they need an 
interpreter.” 

“Worrying about poor ’ickle goblins, now, are you?” 
Ron asked Hermione. “Thinking of starting up 
S.P.U.G. or something? Society for the Protection of 
Ugly Goblins?” 

“Ha, ha, ha,” said Hermione sarcastically. “Goblins 
don’t need protection. Haven’t you been listening to 
what Professor Binns has been telling us about goblin 
rebellions?” 

Page | 496 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“No,” said Harry and Ron together. 

“Well, they’re quite capable of dealing with wizards,” 
said Hermione, taking another sip of butterbeer. 
“They’re very clever. They’re not like house-elves, who 
never stick up for themselves.” 

“Uh-oh,” said Ron, staring at the door. 

Rita Skeeter had just entered. She was wearing 
banana-yellow robes today; her long nails were 
painted shocking pink, and she was accompanied by 
her paunchy photographer. She bought drinks, and 
she and the photographer made their way through 
the crowds to a table nearby, Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione glaring at her as she approached. She was 
talking fast and looking very satisfied about 
something. 

"... didn’t seem very keen to talk to us, did he, Bozo? 
Now, why would that be, do you think? And what’s he 
doing with a pack of goblins in tow anyway? Showing 
them the sights . . . what nonsense ... he was always a 
bad liar. Reckon something’s up? Think we should do 
a bit of digging? ‘Disgraced Ex-Head of Magical 
Games and Sports, Ludo Bagman ...’ Snappy start to 
a sentence, Bozo — we just need to find a story to fit 
it — ” 



“Trying to ruin someone else’s life?” said Harry loudly. 

A few people looked around. Rita Skeeter ’s eyes 
widened behind her jeweled spectacles as she saw 
who had spoken. 

“Harry!” she said, beaming. “How lovely! Why don’t 
you come and join — ?” 



Page | 497 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I wouldn’t come near you with a ten-foot 
broomstick,” said Harry furiously. “What did you do 
that to Hagrid for, eh?” 

Rita Skeeter raised her heavily penciled eyebrows. 

“Our readers have a right to the truth, Harry. I am 
merely doing my — ” 

“Who cares if he’s half- giant?” Harry shouted. “There’s 
nothing wrong with him!” 

The whole pub had gone very quiet. Madam Rosmerta 
was staring over from behind the bar, apparently 
oblivious to the fact that the flagon she was filling 
with mead was overflowing. 

Rita Skeeter’s smile flickered very slightly, but she 
hitched it back almost at once; she snapped open her 
crocodile-skin handbag, pulled out her Quick-Quotes 
Quill, and said, “How about giving me an interview 
about the Hagrid you know, Harry? The man behind 
the muscles? Your unlikely friendship and the 
reasons behind it. Would you call him a father 
substitute?” 

Hermione stood up very abruptly, her butterbeer 
clutched in her hand as though it were a grenade. 

“You horrible woman,” she said, through gritted teeth, 
“you don’t care, do you, anything for a story, and 
anyone will do, won’t they? Even Ludo Bagman — ” 

“Sit down, you silly little girl, and don’t talk about 
things you don’t understand,” said Rita Skeeter 
coldly, her eyes hardening as they fell on Hermione. “I 
know things about Ludo Bagman that would make 
your hair curl . . . not that it needs it — ” she added, 
eyeing Hermione ’s bushy hair. 

Page | 498 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Let’s go,” said Hermione, “c’mon, Harry — Ron ...” 



They left; many people were staring at them as they 
went. Harry glanced back as they reached the door. 
Rita Skeeter’s Quick-Quotes Quill was out; it was 
zooming backward and forward over a piece of 
parchment on the table. 

“She’ll be after you next, Hermione,” said Ron in a low 
and worried voice as they walked quickly back up the 
street. 

“Let her try!” said Hermione defiantly; she was 
shaking with rage. “I’ll show her! Silly little girl, am I? 
Oh, I’ll get her back for this. First Harry, then Hagrid 



“You don’t want to go upsetting Rita Skeeter,” said 
Ron nervously. “I’m serious, Hermione, she’ll dig up 
something on you — ” 

“My parents don’t read the Daily Prophet She can’t 
scare me into hiding!” said Hermione, now striding 
along so fast that it was all Harry and Ron could do to 
keep up with her. The last time Harry had seen 
Hermione in a rage like this, she had hit Draco Malfoy 
around the face. “And Hagrid isn’t hiding anymore! 

He should never have let that excuse for a human 
being upset him! Come on!” 

Breaking into a run, she led them all the way back up 
the road, through the gates flanked by winged boars, 
and up through the grounds to Hagrid ’s cabin. 

The curtains were still drawn, and they could hear 
Fang barking as they approached. 

“Hagrid!” Hermione shouted, pounding on his front 
door. “Hagrid, that’s enough! We know you’re in there! 

Page | 499 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Nobody cares if your mum was a giantess, Hagrid! 

You can’t let that foul Skeeter woman do this to you! 
Hagrid, get out here, you’re just being — ” 

The door opened. Hermione said, “About t — !” and 
then stopped, very suddenly, because she had found 
herself face-to-face, not with Hagrid, but with Albus 
Dumbledore. 

“Good afternoon,” he said pleasantly, smiling down at 
them. 

“We — er — we wanted to see Hagrid,” said Hermione 
in a rather small voice. 

“Yes, I surmised as much,” said Dumbledore, his eyes 
twinkling. “Why don’t you come in?” 

“Oh ... um ... okay,” said Hermione. 

She, Ron, and Harry went into the cabin; Fang 
launched himself upon Harry the moment he entered, 
barking madly and trying to lick his ears. Harry 
fended off Fang and looked around. 

Hagrid was sitting at his table, where there were two 
large mugs of tea. He looked a real mess. His face was 
blotchy, his eyes swollen, and he had gone to the 
other extreme where his hair was concerned; far from 
trying to make it behave, it now looked like a wig of 
tangled wire. 

“Hi, Hagrid,” said Harry. 

Hagrid looked up. 

“ ’Lo,” he said in a very hoarse voice. 



Page | 500 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“More tea, I think,” said Dumbledore, closing the door 
behind Harry, Ron, and Hermione, drawing out his 
wand, and twiddling it; a revolving tea tray appeared 
in midair along with a plate of cakes. Dumbledore 
magicked the tray onto the table, and everybody sat 
down. There was a slight pause, and then 
Dumbledore said, “Did you by any chance hear what 
Miss Granger was shouting, Hagrid?” 

Hermione went slightly pink, but Dumbledore smiled 
at her and continued, “Hermione, Harry, and Ron still 
seem to want to know you, judging by the way they 
were attempting to break down the door.” 

“Of course we still want to know you!” Harry said, 
staring at Hagrid. “You don’t think anything that 
Skeeter cow — sorry, Professor,” he added quickly, 
looking at Dumbledore. 

“I have gone temporarily deaf and haven’t any idea 
what you said, Harry,” said Dumbledore, twiddling 
his thumbs and staring at the ceiling. 

“Er — right,” said Harry sheepishly. “I just meant — 
Hagrid, how could you think we’d care what that — 
woman — wrote about you?” 

Two fat tears leaked out of Hagrid ’s beetle-black eyes 
and fell slowly into his tangled beard. 

“Living proof of what I’ve been telling you, Hagrid,” 
said Dumbledore, still looking carefully up at the 
ceiling. “I have shown you the letters from the 
countless parents who remember you from their own 
days here, telling me in no uncertain terms that if I 
sacked you, they would have something to say about 
it — ” 



Page | 501 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Not all of ’em,” said Hagrid hoarsely. “Not all of ’em 
wan’ me ter stay.” 

“Really, Hagrid, if you are holding out for universal 
popularity, I’m afraid you will be in this cabin for a 
very long time,” said Dumbledore, now peering sternly 
over his half-moon spectacles. “Not a week has 
passed since I became headmaster of this school 
when I haven’t had at least one owl complaining 
about the way I run it. But what should I do? 
Barricade myself in my study and refuse to talk to 
anybody?” 

“Yeh — yeh’re not half-giant!” said Hagrid croakily. 

“Hagrid, look what I’ve got for relatives!” Harry said 
furiously. “Look at the Dursleys!” 

“An excellent point,” said Professor Dumbledore. “My 
own brother, Aberforth, was prosecuted for practicing 
inappropriate charms on a goat. It was all over the 
papers, but did Aberforth hide? No, he did not! He 
held his head high and went about his business as 
usual! Of course, I’m not entirely sure he can read, so 
that may not have been bravery. ...” 

“Come back and teach, Hagrid,” said Hermione 
quietly, “please come back, we really miss you.” 

Hagrid gulped. More tears leaked out down his cheeks 
and into his tangled beard. 

Dumbledore stood up. “I refuse to accept your 
resignation, Hagrid, and I expect you back at work on 
Monday,” he said. “You will join me for breakfast at 
eight-thirty in the Great Hall. No excuses. Good 
afternoon to you all.” 



Page | 502 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore left the cabin, pausing only to scratch 
Fang’s ears. When the door had shut behind him, 
Hagrid began to sob into his dustbin-lid-sized hands. 
Hermione kept patting his arm, and at last, Hagrid 
looked up, his eyes very red indeed, and said, “Great 
man, Dumbledore ... great man ...” 

“Yeah, he is,” said Ron. “Can I have one of these 
cakes, Hagrid?” 

“Help yerself,” said Hagrid, wiping his eyes on the 
back of his hand. “Ar, he’s righ’, o’ course — yeh’re all 
righ’ ... I bin stupid ... my ol’ dad woulda bin 
ashamed o’ the way I’ve bin behavin’. ...” More tears 
leaked out, but he wiped them away more forcefully, 
and said, “Never shown you a picture of my old dad, 
have I? Here ...” 

Hagrid got up, went over to his dresser, opened a 
drawer, and pulled out a picture of a short wizard 
with Hagrid’s crinkled black eyes, beaming as he sat 
on top of Hagrid’s shoulder. Hagrid was a good seven 
or eight feet tall, judging by the apple tree beside him, 
but his face was beardless, young, round, and smooth 
— he looked hardly older than eleven. 

“Tha’ was taken jus’ after I got inter Hogwarts,” 

Hagrid croaked. “Dad was dead chuffed ... thought I 
migh’ not be a wizard, see, ’cos me mum ... well, 
anyway. ’Course, I never was great shakes at magic, 
really ... but at least he never saw me expelled. Died, 
see, in me second year. ... 

“Dumbledore was the one who stuck up for me after 
Dad went. Got me the gamekeeper job ... trusts 
people, he does. Gives ’em second chances ... tha’s 
what sets him apar’ from other heads, see. He’ll 
accept anyone at Hogwarts, s’long as they’ve got the 
talent. Knows people can turn out okay even if their 
Page | 503 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




families weren’ ... well ... all tha’ respectable. But 
some don’ understand that. There’s some who’d 
always hold it against yeh ... there’s some who’d even 
pretend they just had big bones rather than stand up 
an’ say — I am what I am, an’ I’m not ashamed. 

‘Never be ashamed,’ my ol’ dad used ter say, ‘there’s 
some wholl hold it against you, but they’re not worth 
botherin’ with.’ An’ he was right. I’ve bin an idiot. I’m 
not botherin’ with her no more, I promise yeh that. 

Big bones ... I’ll give her big bones.” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked at one another 
nervously; Harry would rather have taken fifty Blast- 
Ended Skrewts for a walk than admit to Hagrid that 
he had overheard him talking to Madame Maxime, 
but Hagrid was still talking, apparently unaware that 
he had said anything odd. 

“Yeh know wha’, Harry?” he said, looking up from the 
photograph of his father, his eyes very bright, “when I 
firs’ met you, you reminded me o’ me a bit. Mum an’ 
Dad gone, an’ you was feelin’ like yeh wouldn’ fit in at 
Hogwarts, remember? Not sure yeh were really up to 
it ... an’ now look at yeh, Harry! School champion!” 

He looked at Harry for a moment and then said, very 
seriously, “Yeh know what I’d love, Harry? I’d love yeh 
ter win, I really would. It’d show ’em all ... yeh don’ 
have ter be pureblood ter do it. Yeh don’ have ter be 
ashamed of what yeh are. It’d show ’em Dumbledore’s 
the one who’s got it righ’, lettin’ anyone in as long as 
they can do magic. How you doin’ with that egg, 
Harry?” 

“Great,” said Harry. “Really great.” 

Hagrid ’s miserable face broke into a wide, watery 
smile. 



Page | 504 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Tha’s my boy ... you show ’em, Harry, you show ’em. 
Beat ’em all.” 

Lying to Hagrid wasn’t quite like lying to anyone else. 
Harry went back to the castle later that afternoon 
with Ron and Hermione, unable to banish the image 
of the happy expression on Hagrid’s whiskery face as 
he had imagined Harry winning the tournament. The 
incomprehensible egg weighed more heavily than ever 
on Harry’s conscience that evening, and by the time 
he had got into bed, he had made up his mind — it 
was time to shelve his pride and see if Cedric’s hint 
was worth anything. 



Page | 505 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 









THE EGG AND THE EYE 

As Harry had no idea how long a bath he would need 
to work out the secret of the golden egg, he decided to 
do it at night, when he would be able to take as much 
time as he wanted. Reluctant though he was to accept 
more favours from Cedric, he also decided to use the 
prefects’ bathroom; far fewer people were allowed in 
there, so it was much less likely that he would be 
disturbed. 

Harry planned his excursion carefully, because he 
had been caught out of bed and out-of-bounds by 
Filch the caretaker in the middle of the night once 
before, and had no desire to repeat the experience. 

The Invisibility Cloak would, of course, be essential, 
and as an added precaution, Harry thought he would 
take the Marauder’s Map, which, next to the cloak, 
was the most useful aid to rule-breaking Harry 
owned. The map showed the whole of Hogwarts, 
including its many shortcuts and secret passageways 
and, most important of all, it revealed the people 
inside the castle as minuscule, labeled dots, moving 
around the corridors, so that Harry would be 
Page | 506 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



forewarned if somebody was approaching the 
bathroom. 



On Thursday night, Harry sneaked up to bed, put on 
the cloak, crept back downstairs, and, just as he had 
done on the night when Hagrid had shown him the 
dragons, waited for the portrait hole to open. This 
time it was Ron who waited outside to give the Fat 
Lady the password (“banana fritters”). “Good luck,” 
Ron muttered, climbing into the room as Harry crept 
out past him. 

It was awkward moving under the cloak tonight, 
because Harry had the heavy egg under one arm and 
the map held in front of his nose with the other. 
However, the moonlit corridors were empty and silent, 
and by checking the map at strategic intervals, Harry 
was able to ensure that he wouldn’t run into anyone 
he wanted to avoid. When he reached the statue of 
Boris the Bewildered, a lost-looking wizard with his 
gloves on the wrong hands, he located the right door, 
leaned close to it, and muttered the password, “Pine 
fresh,” just as Cedric had told him. 

The door creaked open. Harry slipped inside, bolted 
the door behind him, and pulled off the Invisibility 
Cloak, looking around. 

His immediate reaction was that it would be worth 
becoming a prefect just to be able to use this 
bathroom. It was softly lit by a splendid candle-filled 
chandelier, and everything was made of white marble, 
including what looked like an empty, rectangular 
swimming pool sunk into the middle of the floor. 

About a hundred golden taps stood all around the 
pool’s edges, each with a differently colored jewel set 
into its handle. There was also a diving board. Long 
white linen curtains hung at the windows; a large pile 
of fluffy white towels sat in a corner, and there was a 
Page | 507 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




single golden-framed painting on the wall. It featured 
a blonde mermaid who was fast asleep on a rock, her 
long hair over her face. It fluttered every time she 
snored. 

Harry moved forward, looking around, his footsteps 
echoing off the walls. Magnificent though the 
bathroom was — and quite keen though he was to try 
out a few of those taps — now he was here he 
couldn’t quite suppress the feeling that Cedric might 
have been having him on. How on earth was this 
supposed to help solve the mystery of the egg? 
Nevertheless, he put one of the fluffy towels, the 
cloak, the map, and the egg at the side of the 
swimming-pool-sized bath, then knelt down and 
turned on a few of the taps. 

He could tell at once that they carried different sorts 
of bubble bath mixed with the water, though it wasn’t 
bubble bath as Harry had ever experienced it. One 
tap gushed pink and blue bubbles the size of 
footballs; another poured ice-white foam so thick that 
Harry thought it would have supported his weight if 
he’d cared to test it; a third sent heavily perfumed 
purple clouds hovering over the surface of the water. 
Harry amused himself for a while turning the taps on 
and off, particularly enjoying the effect of one whose 
jet bounced off the surface of the water in large arcs. 
Then, when the deep pool was full of hot water, foam, 
and bubbles, which took a very short time 
considering its size, Harry turned off all the taps, 
pulled off his pajamas, slippers, and dressing gown, 
and slid into the water. 

It was so deep that his feet barely touched the 
bottom, and he actually did a couple of lengths before 
swimming back to the side and treading water, 
staring at the egg. Highly enjoyable though it was to 
swim in hot and foamy water with clouds of different- 
Page | 508 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




colored steam wafting all around him, no stroke of 
brilliance came to him, no sudden burst of 
understanding. 

Harry stretched out his arms, lifted the egg in his wet 
hands, and opened it. The wailing, screeching sound 
filled the bathroom, echoing and reverberating off the 
marble walls, but it sounded just as 
incomprehensible as ever, if not more so with all the 
echoes. He snapped it shut again, worried that the 
sound would attract Filch, wondering whether that 
hadn’t been Cedric’s plan — and then, making him 
jump so badly that he dropped the egg, which 
clattered away across the bathroom floor, someone 
spoke. 

“I’d try putting it in the water, if I were you.” 

Harry had swallowed a considerable amount of 
bubbles in shock. He stood up, sputtering, and saw 
the ghost of a very glum-looking girl sitting cross- 
legged on top of one of the taps. It was Moaning 
Myrtle, who was usually to be heard sobbing in the S- 
bend of a toilet three floors below. 

“Myrtle!” Harry said in outrage, “I’m — I’m not 
wearing anything!” 

The foam was so dense that this hardly mattered, but 
he had a nasty feeling that Myrtle had been spying on 
him from out of one of the taps ever since he had 
arrived. 

“I closed my eyes when you got in,” she said, blinking 
at him through her thick spectacles. “You haven’t 
been to see me for ages.” 

“Yeah ... well ...” said Harry, bending his knees 
slightly, just to make absolutely sure Myrtle couldn’t 

Page | 509 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




see anything but his head, “I’m not supposed to come 
into your bathroom, am I? It’s a girls’ one.” 



“You didn’t used to care,” said Myrtle miserably. “You 
used to be in there all the time.” 

This was true, though only because Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione had found Myrtle’s out-of-order toilets a 
convenient place to brew Polyjuice Potion in secret — 
a forbidden potion that had turned him and Ron into 
living replicas of Crabbe and Goyle for an hour, so 
that they could sneak into the Slytherin common 
room. 

“I got told off for going in there,” said Harry, which 
was half-true; Percy had once caught him coming out 
of Myrtle’s bathroom. “I thought I’d better not come 
back after that.” 

“Oh ... I see ...” said Myrtle, picking at a spot on her 
chin in a morose sort of way. “Well... anyway ... I’d try 
the egg in the water. That’s what Cedric Diggory did.” 

“Have you been spying on him too?” said Harry 
indignantly. “What d’you do, sneak up here in the 
evenings to watch the prefects take baths?” 

“Sometimes,” said Myrtle, rather slyly, “but I’ve never 
come out to speak to anyone before.” 

“I’m honored,” said Harry darkly. “You keep your eyes 
shut!” 

He made sure Myrtle had her glasses well covered 
before hoisting himself out of the bath, wrapping the 
towel firmly around his waist, and going to retrieve 
the egg. Once he was back in the water, Myrtle peered 
through her fingers and said, “Go on, then . . . open it 
under the water!” 

Page | 510 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




Harry lowered the egg beneath the foamy surface and 
opened it ... and this time, it did not wail. A gurgling 
song was coming out of it, a song whose words he 
couldn’t distinguish through the water. 

“You need to put your head under too,” said Myrtle, 
who seemed to be thoroughly enjoying bossing him 
around. “Go on!” 

Harry took a great breath and slid under the surface 
— and now, sitting on the marble bottom of the 
bubble-filled bath, he heard a chorus of eerie voices 
singing to him from the open egg in his hands: 

“Come seek us where our voices sound, 

We cannot sing above the ground, 

And while you’re searching ponder this: 

We’ve taken what you’ll sorely miss, 

An hour long you’ll have to look, 

And to recover what we took, 

But past an hour — the prospect’s black, 

Too late, it’s gone, it won’t come back.” 

Harry let himself float back upward and broke the 
bubbly surface, shaking his hair out of his eyes. 

“Hear it?” said Myrtle. 

“Yeah ... ‘Come seek us where our voices sound ...’ 
and if I need persuading . . . hang on, I need to listen 
again. ...” 



Page | 511 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He sank back beneath the water. It took three more 
underwater renditions of the egg’s song before Harry 
had it memorized; then he trod water for a while, 
thinking hard, while Myrtle sat and watched him. 

“I’ve got to go and look for people who can’t use their 
voices above the ground. ...” he said slowly. “Er ... 
who could that be?” 

“Slow, aren’t you?” 

He had never seen Moaning Myrtle so cheerful, apart 
from the day when a dose of Polyjuice Potion had 
given Hermione the hairy face and tail of a cat. Harry 
stared around the bathroom, thinking ... if the voices 
could only be heard underwater, then it made sense 
for them to belong to underwater creatures. He ran 
this theory past Myrtle, who smirked at him. 

“Well, that’s what Diggory thought,” she said. “He lay 
there talking to himself for ages about it. Ages and 
ages ... nearly all the bubbles had gone. ...” 

“Underwater ...” Harry said slowly. “Myrtle ... what 
lives in the lake, apart from the giant squid?” 

“Oh all sorts,” she said. “I sometimes go down there 
... sometimes don’t have any choice, if someone 
flushes my toilet when I’m not expecting it. ...” 

Trying not to think about Moaning Myrtle zooming 
down a pipe to the lake with the contents of a toilet, 
Harry said, “Well, does anything in there have a 
human voice? Hang on — ” 

Harry’s eyes had fallen on the picture of the snoozing 
mermaid on the wall. 

“Myrtle, there aren’t merpeople in there, are there?” 

Page | 512 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Oooh, very good,” she said, her thick glasses 
twinkling, “it took Diggory much longer than that! 

And that was with her awake too” — Myrtle jerked her 
head toward the mermaid with an expression of great 
dislike on her glum face — “giggling and showing off 
and flashing her fins. ...” 

“That’s it, isn’t it?” said Harry excitedly. “The second 
task’s to go and find the merpeople in the lake and . . . 
and ...” 

But he suddenly realized what he was saying, and he 
felt the excitement drain out of him as though 
someone had just pulled a plug in his stomach. He 
wasn’t a very good swimmer; he’d never had much 
practice. Dudley had had lessons in his youth, but 
Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon, no doubt hoping 
that Harry would drown one day, hadn’t bothered to 
give him any. A couple of lengths of this bath were all 
very well, but that lake was very large, and very deep 
. . . and merpeople would surely live right at the 
bottom. ... 

“Myrtle,” Harry said slowly, “how am I supposed to 
breathe ?” 

At this, Myrtle’s eyes filled with sudden tears again. 

“Tactless!” she muttered, groping in her robes for a 
handkerchief. 

“What’s tactless?” said Harry, bewildered. 

“Talking about breathing in front of me!” she said 
shrilly, and her voice echoed loudly around the 
bathroom. “When I can’t ... when I haven’t ... not for 
ages ...” 



Page | 513 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




She buried her face in her handkerchief and sniffed 
loudly. Harry remembered how touchy Myrtle had 
always been about being dead, but none of the other 
ghosts he knew made such a fuss about it. 

“Sorry,” he said impatiently. “I didn’t mean — I just 
forgot ...” 

“Oh yes, very easy to forget Myrtle’s dead,” said 
Myrtle, gulping, looking at him out of swollen eyes. 
“Nobody missed me even when I was alive. Took them 
hours and hours to find my body — I know, I was 
sitting there waiting for them. Olive Hornby came into 
the bathroom — ‘Are you in here again, sulking, 
Myrtle?’ she said, ‘because Professor Dippet asked me 
to look for you — ’ And then she saw my body . . . 
ooooh, she didn’t forget it until her dying day, I made 
sure of that . . . followed her around and reminded her, 
I did. I remember at her brother’s wedding — ” 

But Harry wasn’t listening; he was thinking about the 
merpeople’s song again. “We’ve taken what you’ll 
sorely miss.” That sounded as though they were going 
to steal something of his, something he had to get 
back. What were they going to take? 

“ — and then, of course, she went to the Ministry of 
Magic to stop me stalking her, so I had to come back 
here and live in my toilet.” 

“Good,” said Harry vaguely. “Well, I’m a lot further on 
than I was. ... Shut your eyes again, will you? I’m 
getting out.” 

He retrieved the egg from the bottom of the bath, 
climbed out, dried himself, and pulled on his pajamas 
and dressing gown again. 



Page | 514 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Will you come and visit me in my bathroom again 
sometime?” Moaning Myrtle asked mournfully as 
Harry picked up the Invisibility Cloak. 

“Er ... I’ll try,” Harry said, though privately thinking 
the only way he’d be visiting Myrtle’s bathroom again 
was if every other toilet in the castle got blocked. “See 
you, Myrtle ... thanks for your help.” 

“ ’Bye, ’bye,” she said gloomily, and as Harry put on 
the Invisibility Cloak he saw her zoom back up the 
tap. 

Out in the dark corridor, Harry examined the 
Marauder’s Map to check that the coast was still 
clear. Yes, the dots belonging to Filch and his cat, 

Mrs. Norris, were safely in their office ... nothing else 
seemed to be moving apart from Peeves, though he 
was bouncing around the trophy room on the floor 
above. ... Harry had taken his first step back toward 
Gryffindor Tower when something else on the map 
caught his eye ... something distinctly odd. 

Peeves was not the only thing that was moving. A 
single dot was flitting around a room in the bottom 
left-hand corner — Snape’s office. But the dot wasn’t 
labeled “Severus Snape” ... it was Bartemius Crouch. 

Harry stared at the dot. Mr. Crouch was supposed to 
be too ill to go to work or to come to the Yule Ball — 
so what was he doing, sneaking into Hogwarts at one 
o’clock in the morning? Harry watched closely as the 
dot moved around and around the room, pausing 
here and there. ... 

Harry hesitated, thinking . . . and then his curiosity got 
the better of him. He turned and set off in the 
opposite direction toward the nearest staircase. He 
was going to see what Crouch was up to. 

Page | 515 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry walked down the stairs as quietly as possible, 
though the faces in some of the portraits still turned 
curiously at the squeak of a floorboard, the rustle of 
his pajamas. He crept along the corridor below, 
pushed aside a tapestry about halfway along, and 
proceeded down a narrower staircase, a shortcut that 
would take him down two floors. He kept glancing 
down at the map, wondering ... It just didn’t seem in 
character, somehow, for correct, law-abiding Mr. 
Crouch to be sneaking around somebody else’s office 
this late at night. ... 

And then, halfway down the staircase, not thinking 
about what he was doing, not concentrating on 
anything but the peculiar behavior of Mr. Crouch, 
Harry’s leg suddenly sank right through the trick step 
Neville always forgot to jump. He gave an ungainly 
wobble, and the golden egg, still damp from the bath, 
slipped from under his arm. He lurched forward to try 
and catch it, but too late; the egg fell down the long 
staircase with a bang as loud as a bass drum on 
every step — the Invisibility Cloak slipped — Harry 
snatched at it, and the Marauder’s Map fluttered out 
of his hand and slid down six stairs, where, sunk in 
the step to above his knee, he couldn’t reach it. 

The golden egg fell through the tapestry at the bottom 
of the staircase, burst open, and began wailing loudly 
in the corridor below. Harry pulled out his wand and 
struggled to touch the Marauder’s Map, to wipe it 
blank, but it was too far away to reach — 

Pulling the cloak back over himself Harry 
straightened up, listening hard with his eyes screwed 
up with fear ... and, almost immediately — 

“PEEVES!” 



Page | 516 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




It was the unmistakable hunting cry of Filch the 
caretaker. Harry could hear his rapid, shuffling 
footsteps coming nearer and nearer, his wheezy voice 
raised in fury. 

“What’s this racket? Wake up the whole castle, will 
you? I’ll have you, Peeves, I’ll have you, you’ll ... and 
what is this?” 

Filch ’s footsteps halted; there was a clink of metal on 
metal and the wailing stopped — Filch had picked up 
the egg and closed it. Harry stood very still, one leg 
still jammed tightly in the magical step, listening. Any 
moment now, Filch was going to pull aside the 
tapestry, expecting to see Peeves . . . and there would 
be no Peeves ... but if he came up the stairs, he would 
spot the Marauder’s Map ... and Invisibility Cloak or 
not, the map would show “Harry Potter” standing 
exactly where he was. 

“Egg?” Filch said quietly at the foot of the stairs. “My 
sweet!” — Mrs. Norris was obviously with him — “This 
is a Triwizard clue! This belongs to a school 
champion!” 

Harry felt sick; his heart was hammering very fast — 

“PEEVES!” Filch roared gleefully. “You’ve been 
stealing!” 

He ripped back the tapestry below, and Harry saw his 
horrible, pouchy face and bulging, pale eyes staring 
up the dark and (to Filch) deserted staircase. 

“Hiding, are you?” he said softly. “I’m coming to get 
you, Peeves. ... You’ve gone and stolen a Tri wizard 
clue, Peeves. ... Dumbledore’ll have you out of here 
for this, you filthy, pilfering poltergeist. ...” 



Page | 517 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Filch started to climb the stairs, his scrawny, dust- 
colored cat at his heels. Mrs. Norris’s lamp-like eyes, 
so very like her master’s, were fixed directly upon 
Harry. He had had occasion before now to wonder 
whether the Invisibility Cloak worked on cats. ... Sick 
with apprehension, he watched Filch drawing nearer 
and nearer in his old flannel dressing gown — he 
tried desperately to pull his trapped leg free, but it 
merely sank a few more inches — any second now, 
Filch was going to spot the map or walk right into him 



“Filch? What’s going on?” 

Filch stopped a few steps below Harry and turned. At 
the foot of the stairs stood the only person who could 
make Harry’s situation worse: Snape. He was wearing 
a long gray nightshirt and he looked livid. 

“It’s Peeves, Professor,” Filch whispered malevolently. 
“He threw this egg down the stairs.” 

Snape climbed up the stairs quickly and stopped 
beside Filch. Harry gritted his teeth, convinced his 
loudly thumping heart would give him away at any 
second. ... 

“Peeves?” said Snape softly, staring at the egg in 
Filch’s hands. “But Peeves couldn’t get into my office. 



“This egg was in your office, Professor?” 

“Of course not,” Snape snapped. “I heard banging and 
wailing — ” 

“Yes, Professor, that was the egg — ” 

“ — I was coming to investigate — ” 

Page | 518 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“ — Peeves threw it, Professor — ” 

“ — and when I passed my office, I saw that the 
torches were lit and a cupboard door was ajar! 
Somebody has been searching it!” 

“But Peeves couldn’t — ” 

“I know he couldn’t, Filch!” Snape snapped again. “I 
seal my office with a spell none but a wizard could 
break!” Snape looked up the stairs, straight through 
Harry, and then down into the corridor below. “I want 
you to come and help me search for the intruder, 
Filch.” 

“I — yes, Professor — but — ” 

Filch looked yearningly up the stairs, right through 
Harry, who could see that he was very reluctant to 
forgo the chance of cornering Peeves. Go, Harry 
pleaded with him silently, go with Snape ... go ... Mrs. 
Norris was peering around Filch ’s legs. ... Harry had 
the distinct impression that she could smell him. ... 
Why had he filled that bath with so much perfumed 
foam? 

“The thing is, Professor,” said Filch plaintively, “the 
headmaster will have to listen to me this time. Peeves 
has been stealing from a student, it might be my 
chance to get him thrown out of the castle once and 
for all — ” 

“Filch, I don’t give a damn about that wretched 
poltergeist; it’s my office that’s — ” 

Clunk. Clunk. Clunk. 

Snape stopped talking very abruptly. He and Filch 
both looked down at the foot of the stairs. Harry saw 

Page | 519 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mad-Eye Moody limp into sight through the narrow 
gap between their heads. Moody was wearing his old 
traveling cloak over his nightshirt and leaning on his 
staff as usual. 

“Pajama party, is it?” he growled up the stairs. 

“Professor Snape and I heard noises, Professor,” said 
Filch at once. “Peeves the Poltergeist, throwing things 
around as usual — and then Professor Snape 
discovered that someone had broken into his off — ” 

“Shut up!” Snape hissed to Filch. 

Moody took a step closer to the foot of the stairs. 

Harry saw Moody’s magical eye travel over Snape, and 
then, unmistakably, onto himself. 

Harry’s heart gave a horrible jolt. Moody could see 
through Invisibility Cloaks ... he alone could see the 
full strangeness of the scene: Snape in his nightshirt, 
Filch clutching the egg, and he, Harry, trapped in the 
stairs behind them. Moody’s lopsided gash of a mouth 
opened in surprise. For a few seconds, he and Harry 
stared straight into each other’s eyes. Then Moody 
closed his mouth and turned his blue eye upon Snape 
again. 

“Did I hear that correctly, Snape?” he asked slowly. 
“Someone broke into your office?” 

“It is unimportant,” said Snape coldly. 

“On the contrary,” growled Moody, “it is very 
important. Who’d want to break into your office?” 

“A student, I daresay,” said Snape. Harry could see a 
vein flickering horribly on Snape ’s greasy temple. “It 
has happened before. Potion ingredients have gone 

Page | 520 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




missing from my private store cupboard ... students 
attempting illicit mixtures, no doubt. ...” 

“Reckon they were after potion ingredients, eh?” said 
Moody. “Not hiding anything else in your office, are 
you?” 

Harry saw the edge of Snape ’s sallow face turn a 
nasty brick color, the vein in his temple pulsing more 
rapidly. 

“You know I’m hiding nothing, Moody,” he said in a 
soft and dangerous voice, “as you’ve searched my 
office pretty thoroughly yourself.” 

Moody’s face twisted into a smile. “Auror’s privilege, 
Snape. Dumbledore told me to keep an eye — ” 

“Dumbledore happens to trust me,” said Snape 
through clenched teeth. “I refuse to believe that he 
gave you orders to search my office!” 

“ ’Course Dumbledore trusts you,” growled Moody. 
“He’s a trusting man, isn’t he? Believes in second 
chances. But me — I say there are spots that don’t 
come off, Snape. Spots that never come off, d’you 
know what I mean?” 

Snape suddenly did something very strange. He 
seized his left forearm convulsively with his right 
hand, as though something on it had hurt him. 

Moody laughed. “Get back to bed, Snape.” 

“You don’t have the authority to send me anywhere!” 
Snape hissed, letting go of his arm as though angry 
with himself. “I have as much right to prowl this 
school after dark as you do!” 



Page | 521 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Prowl away,” said Moody, but his voice was full of 
menace. “I look forward to meeting you in a dark 
corridor some time. ... You’ve dropped something, by 
the way. ...” 

With a stab of horror, Harry saw Moody point at the 
Marauder’s Map, still lying on the staircase six steps 
below him. As Snape and Filch both turned to look at 
it, Harry threw caution to the winds; he raised his 
arms under the cloak and waved furiously at Moody 
to attract his attention, mouthing “It’s mine! Mine!” 

Snape had reached out for it, a horrible expression of 
dawning comprehension on his face — 

“Accio Parchments 

The map flew up into the air, slipped through Snape ’s 
outstretched fingers, and soared down the stairs into 
Moody’s hand. 

“My mistake,” Moody said calmly. “It’s mine — 
must’ve dropped it earlier — ” 

But Snape ’s black eyes were darting from the egg in 
Filch’s arms to the map in Moody’s hand, and Harry 
could tell he was putting two and two together, as 
only Snape could. ... 

“Potter,” he said quietly. 

“What’s that?” said Moody calmly, folding up the map 
and pocketing it. 

“Potter!” Snape snarled, and he actually turned his 
head and stared right at the place where Harry was, 
as though he could suddenly see him. “That egg is 
Potter’s egg. That piece of parchment belongs to 



Page | 522 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Potter. I have seen it before, I recognize it! Potter is 
here! Potter, in his Invisibility Cloak!” 

Snape stretched out his hands like a blind man and 
began to move up the stairs; Harry could have sworn 
his over-large nostrils were dilating, trying to sniff 
Harry out — trapped, Harry leaned backward, trying 
to avoid Snape’s fingertips, but any moment now — 

“There’s nothing there, Snape!” barked Moody, “but 
I’ll be happy to tell the headmaster how quickly your 
mind jumped to Harry Potter!” 

“Meaning what?” Snape turned again to look at 
Moody, his hands still outstretched, inches from 
Harry’s chest. 

“Meaning that Dumbledore’s very interested to know 
who’s got it in for that boy!” said Moody, limping 
nearer still to the foot of the stairs. “And so am I, 
Snape ... very interested. ...” The torchlight flickered 
across his mangled face, so that the scars, and the 
chunk missing from his nose, looked deeper and 
darker than ever. 

Snape was looking down at Moody, and Harry 
couldn’t see the expression on his face. For a 
moment, nobody moved or said anything. Then Snape 
slowly lowered his hands. 

“I merely thought,” said Snape, in a voice of forced 
calm, “that if Potter was wandering around after 
hours again ... it’s an unfortunate habit of his ... he 
should be stopped. For — for his own safety.” 

“Ah, I see,” said Moody softly. “Got Potter’s best 
interests at heart, have you?” 



Page | 523 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




There was a pause. Snape and Moody were still 
staring at each other. Mrs. Norris gave a loud meow, 
still peering around Filch’s legs, looking for the source 
of Harry’s bubble-bath smell. 

“I think I will go back to bed,” Snape said curtly. 

“Best idea you’ve had all night,” said Moody. “Now, 
Filch, if you’ll just give me that egg — ” 

“No!” said Filch, clutching the egg as though it were 
his firstborn son. “Professor Moody, this is evidence of 
Peeves’ treachery!” 

“It’s the property of the champion he stole it from,” 
said Moody. “Hand it over, now.” 

Snape swept downstairs and passed Moody without 
another word. Filch made a chirruping noise to Mrs. 
Norris, who stared blankly at Harry for a few more 
seconds before turning and following her master. Still 
breathing very fast, Harry heard Snape walking away 
down the corridor; Filch handed Moody the egg and 
disappeared from view too, muttering to Mrs. Norris. 
“Never mind, my sweet ... we’ll see Dumbledore in the 
morning ... tell him what Peeves was up to. ...” 

A door slammed. Harry was left staring down at 
Moody, who placed his staff on the bottommost stair 
and started to climb laboriously toward him, a dull 
clunk on every other step. 

“Close shave, Potter,” he muttered. 

“Yeah ... I — er ... thanks,” said Harry weakly. 

“What is this thing?” said Moody, drawing the 
Marauders Map out of his pocket and unfolding it. 



Page | 524 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Map of Hogwarts,” said Harry, hoping Moody was 
going to pull him out of the staircase soon; his leg 
was really hurting him. 

“Merlin’s beard,” Moody whispered, staring at the 
map, his magical eye going haywire. “This ... this is 
some map, Potter!” 

“Yeah, it’s ... quite useful,” Harry said. His eyes were 
starting to water from the pain. “Er — Professor 
Moody, d’you think you could help me — ?” 

“What? Oh! Yes ... yes, of course ...” 

Moody took hold of Harry’s arms and pulled; Harry’s 
leg came free of the trick step, and he climbed onto 
the one above it. Moody was still gazing at the map. 

“Potter ...” he said slowly, “you didn’t happen, by any 
chance, to see who broke into Snape’s office, did you? 
On this map, I mean?” 

“Er ... yeah, I did ...” Harry admitted. “It was Mr. 
Crouch.” 

Moody’s magical eye whizzed over the entire surface of 
the map. He looked suddenly alarmed. 

“Crouch?” he said. “You’re — you’re sure, Potter?” 

“Positive,” said Harry. 

“Well, he’s not here anymore,” said Moody, his eye 
still whizzing over the map. “Crouch ... that’s very — 
very interesting. ...” 

He said nothing for almost a minute, still staring at 
the map. Harry could tell that this news meant 
something to Moody and very much wanted to know 

Page | 525 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




what it was. He wondered whether he dared ask. 
Moody scared him slightly ... yet Moody had just 
helped him avoid an awful lot of trouble. ... 

“Er ... Professor Moody ... why d’you reckon Mr. 
Crouch wanted to look around S nape’s office?” 

Moody’s magical eye left the map and fixed, quivering, 
upon Harry. It was a penetrating glare, and Harry had 
the impression that Moody was sizing him up, 
wondering whether to answer or not, or how much to 
tell him. 

“Put it this way, Potter,” Moody muttered finally, “they 
say old Mad-Eye’s obsessed with catching Dark 
wizards ... but I’m nothing — nothing — compared to 
Barty Crouch.” 

He continued to stare at the map. Harry was burning 
to know more. 

“Professor Moody?” he said again. “D’you think ... 
could this have anything to do with . . . maybe Mr. 
Crouch thinks there’s something going on. ...” 

“Like what?” said Moody sharply. 

Harry wondered how much he dare say. He didn’t 
want Moody to guess that he had a source of 
information outside Hogwarts; that might lead to 
tricky questions about Sirius. 

“I don’t know,” Harry muttered, “odd stuff’s been 
happening lately, hasn’t it? It’s been in the Daily 
Prophet ... the Dark Mark at the World Cup, and the 
Death Eaters and everything. ...” 

Both of Moody’s mismatched eyes widened. 



Page | 526 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You’re a sharp boy, Potter,” he said. His magical eye 
roved back to the Marauder’s Map. “Crouch could be 
thinking along those lines,” he said slowly. “Very 
possible ... there have been some funny rumors flying 
around lately — helped along by Rita Skeeter, of 
course. It’s making a lot of people nervous, I reckon.” 

A grim smile twisted his lopsided mouth. “Oh if 
there’s one thing I hate,” he muttered, more to himself 
than to Harry, and his magical eye was fixed on the 
left-hand corner of the map, “it’s a Death Eater who 
walked free. ...” 

Harry stared at him. Could Moody possibly mean 
what Harry thought he meant? 

“And now I want to ask you a question, Potter,” said 
Moody in a more businesslike tone. 

Harry’s heart sank; he had thought this was coming. 
Moody was going to ask where he had got this map, 
which was a very dubious magical object — and the 
story of how it had fallen into his hands incriminated 
not only him, but his own father, Fred and George 
Weasley, and Professor Lupin, their last Defense 
Against the Dark Arts teacher. Moody waved the map 
in front of Harry, who braced himself — 

“Can I borrow this?” 

“Oh!” said Harry. 

He was very fond of his map, but on the other hand, 
he was extremely relieved that Moody wasn’t asking 
where he’d got it, and there was no doubt that he 
owed Moody a favor. 

“Yeah, okay.” 



Page | 527 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Good boy,” growled Moody. “I can make good use of 
this ... this might be exactly what I’ve been looking 
for. ... Right, bed, Potter, come on, now. ...” 

They climbed to the top of the stairs together, Moody 
still examining the map as though it was a treasure 
the like of which he had never seen before. They 
walked in silence to the door of Moody’s office, where 
he stopped and looked up at Harry. 

“You ever thought of a career as an Auror, Potter?” 

“No,” said Harry, taken aback. 

“You want to consider it,” said Moody, nodding and 
looking at Harry thoughtfully. “Yes, indeed ... and 
incidentally ... I’m guessing you weren’t just taking 
that egg for a walk tonight?” 

“Er — no,” said Harry, grinning. “I’ve been working 
out the clue.” 

Moody winked at him, his magical eye going haywire 
again. 

“Nothing like a nighttime stroll to give you ideas, 
Potter. ... See you in the morning. ...” 

He went back into his office, staring down at the 
Marauder’s Map again, and closed the door behind 
him. 

Harry walked slowly back to Gryffindor Tower, lost in 
thought about Snape, and Crouch, and what it all 
meant. ... Why was Crouch pretending to be ill, if he 
could manage to get to Hogwarts when he wanted to? 
What did he think Snape was concealing in his office? 



Page | 528 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




And Moody thought he, Harry, ought to be an Auror! 
Interesting idea . . . but somehow, Harry thought, as 
he got quietly into his four-poster ten minutes later, 
the egg and the cloak now safely back in his trunk, he 
thought he’d like to check how scarred the rest of 
them were before he chose it as a career. 



Page | 529 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 







THE SECOND TASK 

“You said you’d already worked out that egg clue!” 
said Hermione indignantly. 

“Keep your voice down!” said Harry crossly. “I just 
need to — sort of fine-tune it, all right?” 

He, Ron, and Hermione were sitting at the very back 
of the Charms class with a table to themselves. They 
were supposed to be practicing the opposite of the 
Summoning Charm today — the Banishing Charm. 
Owing to the potential for nasty accidents when 
objects kept flying across the room, Professor Flitwick 
had given each student a stack of cushions on which 
to practice, the theory being that these wouldn’t hurt 
anyone if they went off target. It was a good theory, 
but it wasn’t working very well. Neville’s aim was so 
poor that he kept accidentally sending much heavier 
things flying across the room — Professor Flitwick, for 
instance. 

“Just forget the egg for a minute, all right?” Harry 
hissed as Professor Flitwick went whizzing resignedly 

Page | 530 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



past them, landing on top of a large cabinet. “I’m 
trying to tell you about Snape and Moody. ...” 

This class was an ideal cover for a private 
conversation, as everyone was having far too much 
fun to pay them any attention. Harry had been 
recounting his adventures of the previous night in 
whispered installments for the last half hour. 

“Snape said Moody’s searched his office as well?” Ron 
whispered, his eyes alight with interest as he 
Banished a cushion with a sweep of his wand (it 
soared into the air and knocked Parvati’s hat off). 
“What ... d’you reckon Moody’s here to keep an eye on 
Snape as well as Karkaroff?” 

“Well, I dunno if that’s what Dumbledore asked him 
to do, but he’s definitely doing it,” said Harry, waving 
his wand without paying much attention, so that his 
cushion did an odd sort of belly flop off the desk. 
“Moody said Dumbledore only lets Snape stay here 
because he’s giving him a second chance or 
something. ...” 

“What?” said Ron, his eyes widening, his next cushion 
spinning high into the air, ricocheting off the 
chandelier, and dropping heavily onto Flitwick’s desk. 
“Harry . . . maybe Moody thinks Snape put your name 
in the Goblet of Fire!” 

“Oh Ron,” said Hermione, shaking her head 
sceptically, “we thought Snape was trying to kill 
Harry before, and it turned out he was saving Harry’s 
life, remember?” 

She Banished a cushion and it flew across the room 
and landed in the box they were all supposed to be 
aiming at. Harry looked at Hermione, thinking ... it 
was true that Snape had saved his life once, but the 

Page | 531 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




odd thing was, Snape definitely loathed him, just as 
he’d loathed Harry’s father when they had been at 
school together. Snape loved taking points from 
Harry, and had certainly never missed an opportunity 
to give him punishments, or even to suggest that he 
should be suspended from the school. 

“I don’t care what Moody says,” Hermione went on. 
“Dumbledore’s not stupid. He was right to trust 
Hagrid and Professor Lupin, even though loads of 
people wouldn’t have given them jobs, so why 
shouldn’t he be right about Snape, even if Snape is a 
bit — ” 



“ — evil,” said Ron promptly. “Come on, Hermione, 
why are all these Dark wizard catchers searching his 
office, then?” 

“Why has Mr. Crouch been pretending to be ill?” said 
Hermione, ignoring Ron. “It’s a bit funny, isn’t it, that 
he can’t manage to come to the Yule Ball, but he can 
get up here in the middle of the night when he wants 
to?” 

“You just don’t like Crouch because of that elf, 
Winky,” said Ron, sending a cushion soaring into the 
window. 

“You just want to think Snape’s up to something,” 
said Hermione, sending her cushion zooming neatly 
into the box. 

“I just want to know what Snape did with his first 
chance, if he’s on his second one,” said Harry grimly, 
and his cushion, to his very great surprise, flew 
straight across the room and landed neatly on top of 
Hermione ’s. 



Page | 532 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Obedient to Sirius’s wish of hearing about anything 
odd at Hogwarts, Harry sent him a letter by brown 
owl that night, explaining all about Mr. Crouch 
breaking into Snape’s office, and Moody and Snape’s 
conversation. Then Harry turned his attention in 
earnest to the most urgent problem facing him: how 
to survive underwater for an hour on the twenty- 
fourth of February. 

Ron quite liked the idea of using the Summoning 
Charm again — Harry had explained about Aqua- 
Lungs, and Ron couldn’t see why Harry shouldn’t 
Summon one from the nearest Muggle town. 

Hermione squashed this plan by pointing out that, in 
the unlikely event that Harry managed to learn how 
to operate an Aqua-Lung within the set limit of an 
hour, he was sure to be disqualified for breaking the 
International Code of Wizarding Secrecy — it was too 
much to hope that no Muggles would spot an Aqua- 
Lung zooming across the countryside to Hogwarts. 

“Of course, the ideal solution would be for you to 
Transfigure yourself into a submarine or something,” 
Hermione said. “If only we’d done human 
Transfiguration already! But I don’t think we start 
that until sixth year, and it can go badly wrong if you 
don’t know what you’re doing. ...” 

“Yeah, I don’t fancy walking around with a periscope 
sticking out of my head,” said Harry. “I s’pose I could 
always attack someone in front of Moody; he might do 
it for me. ...” 

“I don’t think he’d let you choose what you wanted to 
be turned into, though,” said Hermione seriously. 

“No, I think your best chance is some sort of charm.” 

So Harry, thinking that he would soon have had 
enough of the library to last him a lifetime, buried 

Page | 533 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




himself once more among the dusty volumes, looking 
for any spell that might enable a human to survive 
without oxygen. However, though he, Ron, and 
Hermione searched through their lunchtimes, 
evenings, and whole weekends — though Harry asked 
Professor McGonagall for a note of permission to use 
the Restricted Section, and even asked the irritable, 
vulture-like librarian, Madam Pince, for help — they 
found nothing whatsoever that would enable Harry to 
spend an hour underwater and live to tell the tale. 

Familiar flutterings of panic were starting to disturb 
Harry now, and he was finding it difficult to 
concentrate in class again. The lake, which Harry had 
always taken for granted as just another feature of 
the grounds, drew his eyes whenever he was near a 
classroom window, a great, iron-gray mass of chilly 
water, whose dark and icy depths were starting to 
seem as distant as the moon. 

Just as it had before he faced the Horntail, time was 
slipping away as though somebody had bewitched the 
clocks to go extra-fast. There was a week to go before 
February the twenty-fourth (there was still time) ... 
there were five days to go (he was bound to find 
something soon) ... three days to go (please let me find 
something . . . please) . . . 

With two days left, Harry started to go off food again. 
The only good thing about breakfast on Monday was 
the return of the brown owl he had sent to Sirius. He 
pulled off the parchment, unrolled it, and saw the 
shortest letter Sirius had ever written to him. 

Send date of next Hogsmeade weekend by return owl. 

Harry turned the parchment over and looked at the 
back, hoping to see something else, but it was blank. 



Page | 534 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Weekend after next,” whispered Hermione, who had 
read the note over Harry’s shoulder. “Here — take my 
quill and send this owl back straight away.” 

Harry scribbled the dates down on the back of 
Sirius’s letter, tied it onto the brown owl’s leg, and 
watched it take flight again. What had he expected? 
Advice on how to survive underwater? He had been so 
intent on telling Sirius all about Snape and Moody he 
had completely forgotten to mention the egg’s clue. 

“What’s he want to know about the next Hogsmeade 
weekend for?” said Ron. 

“Dunno,” said Harry dully. The momentary happiness 
that had flared inside him at the sight of the owl had 
died. “Come on ... Care of Magical Creatures.” 

Whether Hagrid was trying to make up for the Blast- 
Ended Skrewts, or because there were now only two 
skrewts left, or because he was trying to prove he 
could do anything that Professor Grubbly-Plank 
could, Harry didn’t know, but Hagrid had been 
continuing her lessons on unicorns ever since he’d 
returned to work. It turned out that Hagrid knew 
quite as much about unicorns as he did about 
monsters, though it was clear that he found their lack 
of poisonous fangs disappointing. 

Today he had managed to capture two unicorn foals. 
Unlike full-grown unicorns, they were pure gold. 
Parvati and Lavender went into transports of delight 
at the sight of them, and even Pansy Parkinson had 
to work hard to conceal how much she liked them. 

“Easier ter spot than the adults,” Hagrid told the 
class. “They turn silver when they’re abou’ two years 
old, an’ they grow horns at aroun’ four. Don’ go pure 
white till they’re full grown, ’round about seven. 

Page | 535 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




They’re a bit more trustin’ when they’re babies ... don’ 
mind boys so much. ... C’mon, move in a bit, yeh can 
pat ’em if yeh want ... give ’em a few o’ these sugar 
lumps. ... 

“You okay, Harry?” Hagrid muttered, moving aside 
slightly, while most of the others swarmed around the 
baby unicorns. 

“Yeah,” said Harry. 

“Jus’ nervous, eh?” said Hagrid. 

“Bit,” said Harry. 

“Harry,” said Hagrid, clapping a massive hand on his 
shoulder, so that Harry’s knees buckled under its 
weight, “I’d’ve bin worried before I saw yeh take on 
tha’ Horntail, but I know now yeh can do anythin’ yeh 
set yer mind ter. I’m not worried at all. Yeh’re goin’ ter 
be fine. Got yer clue worked out, haven’ yeh?” 

Harry nodded, but even as he did so, an insane urge 
to confess that he didn’t have any idea how to survive 
at the bottom of the lake for an hour came over him. 
He looked up at Hagrid — perhaps he had to go into 
the lake sometimes, to deal with the creatures in it? 
He looked after everything else on the grounds, after 
all — 

“Yeh’re goin’ ter win,” Hagrid growled, patting Harry’s 
shoulder again, so that Harry actually felt himself 
sink a couple of inches into the soft ground. “I know 
it. I can feel it. Yeh’re goin’ ter win, Harry.” 

Harry just couldn’t bring himself to wipe the happy, 
confident smile off Hagrid ’s face. Pretending he was 
interested in the young unicorns, he forced a smile in 



Page | 536 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




return, and moved forward to pat them with the 
others. 



By the evening before the second task, Harry felt as 
though he were trapped in a nightmare. He was fully 
aware that even if, by some miracle, he managed to 
find a suitable spell, he’d have a real job mastering it 
overnight. How could he have let this happen? Why 
hadn’t he got to work on the egg’s clue sooner? Why 
had he ever let his mind wander in class — what if a 
teacher had once mentioned how to breathe 
underwater? 

He sat with Hermione and Ron in the library as the 
sun set outside, tearing feverishly through page after 
page of spells, hidden from one another by the 
massive piles of books on the desk in front of each of 
them. Harry’s heart gave a huge leap every time he 
saw the word “water” on a page, but more often than 
not it was merely “Take two pints of water, half a 
pound of shredded mandrake leaves, and a newt ...” 

“I don’t reckon it can be done,” said Ron’s voice flatly 
from the other side of the table. “There’s nothing. 
Nothing. Closest was that thing to dry up puddles and 
ponds, that Drought Charm, but that was nowhere 
near powerful enough to drain the lake.” 

“There must be something,” Hermione muttered, 
moving a candle closer to her. Her eyes were so tired 
she was poring over the tiny print of Olde and 
Forgotten Bewitchments and Charmes with her nose 
about an inch from the page. “They’d never have set a 
task that was undoable.” 

“They have,” said Ron. “Harry, just go down to the 
lake tomorrow, right, stick your head in, yell at the 
merpeople to give back whatever they’ve nicked, and 
see if they chuck it out. Best you can do, mate.” 

Page | 537 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“There’s a way of doing it!” Hermione said crossly. 
“There just has to be!” 

She seemed to be taking the library’s lack of useful 
information on the subject as a personal insult; it had 
never failed her before. 

“I know what I should have done,” said Harry, resting, 
facedown, on Saucy Tricks for Tricky Sorts. “I 
should’ve learned to be an Animagus like Sirius.” 

An Animagus was a wizard who could transform into 
an animal. 

“Yeah, you could’ve turned into a goldfish any time 
you wanted!” said Ron. 

“Or a frog,” yawned Harry. He was exhausted. 

“It takes years to become an Animagus, and then you 
have to register yourself and everything,” said 
Hermione vaguely, now squinting down the index of 
Weird Wizarding Dilemmas and Their Solutions. 
“Professor McGonagall told us, remember ... you’ve 
got to register yourself with the Improper Use of Magic 
Office ... what animal you become, and your 
markings, so you can’t abuse it. ...” 

“Hermione, I was joking,” said Harry wearily. “I know I 
haven’t got a chance of turning into a frog by 
tomorrow morning. ...” 

“Oh this is no use,” Hermione said, snapping shut 
Weird Wizarding Dilemmas. “Who on earth wants to 
make their nose hair grow into ringlets?” 

“I wouldn’t mind,” said Fred Weasley’s voice. “Be a 
talking point, wouldn’t it?” 



Page | 538 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked up. Fred and 
George had just emerged from behind some 
bookshelves. 

“What’re you two doing here?” Ron asked. 

“Looking for you,” said George. “McGonagall wants 
you, Ron. And you, Hermione.” 

“Why?” said Hermione, looking surprised. 

“Dunno ... she was looking a bit grim, though,” said 
Fred. 

“We’re supposed to take you down to her office,” said 
George. 

Ron and Hermione stared at Harry, who felt his 
stomach drop. Was Professor McGonagall about to tell 
Ron and Hermione off? Perhaps she’d noticed how 
much they were helping him, when he ought to be 
working out how to do the task alone? 

“Well meet you back in the common room,” Hermione 
told Harry as she got up to go with Ron — both of 
them looked very anxious. “Bring as many of these 
books as you can, okay?” 

“Right,” said Harry uneasily. 

By eight o’clock, Madam Pince had extinguished all 
the lamps and came to chivvy Harry out of the library. 
Staggering under the weight of as many books as he 
could carry, Harry returned to the Gryffindor common 
room, pulled a table into a corner, and continued to 
search. There was nothing in Madcap Magic for 
Wacky Warlocks . . . nothing in A Guide to Medieval 
Sorcery . . . not one mention of underwater exploits in 
An Anthology of Eighteenth-Century Charms, or in 
Page | 539 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dreadful Denizens of the Deep, or Powers You Never 
Knew You Had and What to Do with Them Now You’ve 
Wised Up. 

Crookshanks crawled into Harry’s lap and curled up, 
purring deeply. The common room emptied slowly 
around Harry. People kept wishing him luck for the 
next morning in cheery, confident voices like Hagrid’s, 
all of them apparently convinced that he was about to 
pull off another stunning performance like the one he 
had managed in the first task. Harry couldn’t answer 
them, he just nodded, feeling as though there were a 
golfball stuck in his throat. By ten to midnight, he 
was alone in the room with Crookshanks. He had 
searched all the remaining books, and Ron and 
Hermione had not come back. 

It’s over, he told himself. You can’t do it. You’ll just 
have to go down to the lake in the morning and tell 
the judges. ... 

He imagined himself explaining that he couldn’t do 
the task. He pictured Bagman’s look of round-eyed 
surprise, Karkaroff’s satisfied, yellow-toothed smile. 

He could almost hear Fleur Delacour saying “I knew it 
... ’e is too young, ’e is only a little boy.” He saw Malfoy 
flashing his POTTER STINKS badge at the front of the 
crowd, saw Hagrid’s crestfallen, disbelieving face. ... 

Forgetting that Crookshanks was on his lap, Harry 
stood up very suddenly; Crookshanks hissed angrily 
as he landed on the floor, gave Harry a disgusted 
look, and stalked away with his bottlebrush tail in the 
air, but Harry was already hurrying up the spiral 
staircase to his dormitory. . . . He would grab the 
Invisibility Cloak and go back to the library, he’d stay 
there all night if he had to. ... 



Page | 540 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Lumos,” Harry whispered fifteen minutes later as he 
opened the library door. 

Wand tip alight, he crept along the bookshelves, 
pulling down more books — books of hexes and 
charms, books on merpeople and water monsters, 
books on famous witches and wizards, on magical 
inventions, on anything at all that might include one 
passing reference to underwater survival. He carried 
them over to a table, then set to work, searching them 
by the narrow beam of his wand, occasionally 
checking his watch. ... 

One in the morning . . . two in the morning . . . the only 
way he could keep going was to tell himself, over and 
over again, next book ...in the next one . . . the next one 



The mermaid in the painting in the prefects’ 
bathroom was laughing. Harry was bobbing like a 
cork in bubbly water next to her rock, while she held 
his Firebolt over his head. 

“Come and get it!” she giggled maliciously. “Come on, 
jump!” 

“I can’t,” Harry panted, snatching at the Firebolt, and 
struggling not to sink. “Give it to me!” 

But she just poked him painfully in the side with the 
end of the broomstick, laughing at him. 

“That hurts — get off — ouch — ” 

“Harry Potter must wake up, sir!” 

“Stop poking me — ” 



Page | 541 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Dobby must poke Harry Potter, sir, he must wake 
up!” 

Harry opened his eyes. He was still in the library; the 
Invisibility Cloak had slipped off his head as he’d 
slept, and the side of his face was stuck to the pages 
of Where There’s a Wand, There’s a Way. He sat up, 
straightening his glasses, blinking in the bright 
daylight. 

“Harry Potter needs to hurry!” squeaked Dobby. “The 
second task starts in ten minutes, and Harry Potter 



“Ten minutes?” Harry croaked. “Ten — ten minutes?” 

He looked down at his watch. Dobby was right. It was 
twenty past nine. A large, dead weight seemed to fall 
through Harry’s chest into his stomach. 

“Hurry, Harry Potter!” squeaked Dobby, plucking at 
Harry’s sleeve. “You is supposed to be down by the 
lake with the other champions, sir!” 

“It’s too late, Dobby,” Harry said hopelessly. “I’m not 
doing the task, I don’t know how — ” 

“Harry Potter will do the task!” squeaked the elf. 
“Dobby knew Harry had not found the right book, so 
Dobby did it for him!” 

“What?” said Harry. “But you don’t know what the 
second task is — ” 

“Dobby knows, sir! Harry Potter has to go into the 
lake and find his Wheezy — ” 

“Find my what?” 



Page | 542 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“ — and take his Wheezy back from the merpeople!” 



“What’s a Wheezy?” 

“Your Wheezy, sir, your Wheezy — Wheezy who is 
giving Dobby his sweater!” 

Dobby plucked at the shrunken maroon sweater he 
was now wearing over his shorts. 

“What?” Harry gasped. “They’ve got ... they’ve got 
Ron?” 

“The thing Harry Potter will miss most, sir!” squeaked 
Dobby. “ ‘But past an hour — ’ ” 

“ — ‘the prospect’s black,’ ” Harry recited, staring, 
horror-struck, at the elf. “ ‘Too late, it’s gone, it won’t 
come back.’ Dobby — what’ve I got to do?” 

“You has to eat this, sir!” squeaked the elf, and he put 
his hand in the pocket of his shorts and drew out a 
ball of what looked like slimy, grayish-green rat tails. 
“Right before you go into the lake, sir — gillyweed!” 

“What’s it do?” said Harry, staring at the gillyweed. 

“It will make Harry Potter breathe underwater, sir!” 

“Dobby,” said Harry frantically, “listen — are you sure 
about this?” 

He couldn’t quite forget that the last time Dobby had 
tried to “help” him, he had ended up with no bones in 
his right arm. 

“Dobby is quite sure, sir!” said the elf earnestly. 
“Dobby hears things, sir, he is a house-elf, he goes all 
over the castle as he lights the fires and mops the 

Page | 543 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




floors. Dobby heard Professor McGonagall and 
Professor Moody in the staffroom, talking about the 
next task. . . . Dobby cannot let Harry Potter lose his 
Wheezy!” 

Harry’s doubts vanished. Jumping to his feet he 
pulled off the Invisibility Cloak, stuffed it into his bag, 
grabbed the gillyweed, and put it into his pocket, then 
tore out of the library with Dobby at his heels. 

“Dobby is supposed to be in the kitchens, sir!” Dobby 
squealed as they burst into the corridor. “Dobby will 
be missed — good luck, Harry Potter, sir, good luck!” 

“See you later, Dobby!” Harry shouted, and he 
sprinted along the corridor and down the stairs, three 
at a time. 

The entrance hall contained a few last-minute 
stragglers, all leaving the Great Hall after breakfast 
and heading through the double oak doors to watch 
the second task. They stared as Harry flashed past, 
sending Colin and Dennis Creevey flying as he leapt 
down the stone steps and out onto the bright, chilly 
grounds. 

As he pounded down the lawn he saw that the seats 
that had encircled the dragons’ enclosure in 
November were now ranged along the opposite bank, 
rising in stands that were packed to the bursting 
point and reflected in the lake below. The excited 
babble of the crowd echoed strangely across the water 
as Harry ran flat-out around the other side of the lake 
toward the judges, who were sitting at another gold- 
draped table at the water’s edge. Cedric, Fleur, and 
Krum were beside the judges’ table, watching Harry 
sprint toward them. 



Page | 544 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




‘Tm ... here ...” Harry panted, skidding to a halt in 
the mud and accidentally splattering Fleur’s robes. 

“Where have you been?” said a bossy, disapproving 
voice. “The task’s about to start!” 

Harry looked around. Percy Weasley was sitting at the 
judges’ table — Mr. Crouch had failed to turn up 
again. 

“Now, now, Percy!” said Ludo Bagman, who was 
looking intensely relieved to see Harry. “Let him catch 
his breath!” 

Dumbledore smiled at Harry, but Karkaroff and 
Madame Maxime didn’t look at all pleased to see him. 
... It was obvious from the looks on their faces that 
they had thought he wasn’t going to turn up. 

Harry bent over, hands on his knees, gasping for 
breath; he had a stitch in his side that felt as though 
he had a knife between his ribs, but there was no 
time to get rid of it; Ludo Bagman was now moving 
among the champions, spacing them along the bank 
at intervals of ten feet. Harry was on the very end of 
the line, next to Krum, who was wearing swimming 
trunks and was holding his wand ready. 

“All right, Harry?” Bagman whispered as he moved 
Harry a few feet farther away from Krum. “Know what 
you’re going to do?” 

“Yeah,” Harry panted, massaging his ribs. 

Bagman gave Harry’s shoulder a quick squeeze and 
returned to the judges’ table; he pointed his wand at 
his throat as he had done at the World Cup, said, 
“Sonorusl” and his voice boomed out across the dark 
water toward the stands. 

Page | 545 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, all our champions are ready for the second 
task, which will start on my whistle. They have 
precisely an hour to recover what has been taken 
from them. On the count of three, then. One ... two ... 
three!” 

The whistle echoed shrilly in the cold, still air; the 
stands erupted with cheers and applause; without 
looking to see what the other champions were doing, 
Harry pulled off his shoes and socks, pulled the 
handful of gillyweed out of his pocket, stuffed it into 
his mouth, and waded out into the lake. 

It was so cold he felt the skin on his legs searing as 
though this were fire, not icy water. His sodden robes 
weighed him down as he walked in deeper; now the 
water was over his knees, and his rapidly numbing 
feet were slipping over silt and flat, slimy stones. He 
was chewing the gillyweed as hard and fast as he 
could; it felt unpleasantly slimy and rubbery, like 
octopus tentacles. Waist-deep in the freezing water he 
stopped, swallowed, and waited for something to 
happen. 

He could hear laughter in the crowd and knew he 
must look stupid, walking into the lake without 
showing any sign of magical power. The part of him 
that was still dry was covered in goose pimples; half 
immersed in the icy water, a cruel breeze lifting his 
hair, Harry started to shiver violently. He avoided 
looking at the stands; the laughter was becoming 
louder, and there were catcalls and jeering from the 
Slytherins. ... 

Then, quite suddenly, Harry felt as though an 
invisible pillow had been pressed over his mouth and 
nose. He tried to draw breath, but it made his head 
spin; his lungs were empty, and he suddenly felt a 
piercing pain on either side of his neck — 

Page | 546 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry clapped his hands around his throat and felt 
two large slits just below his ears, flapping in the cold 
air. ... He had gills. Without pausing to think, he did 
the only thing that made sense — he flung himself 
forward into the water. 

The first gulp of icy lake water felt like the breath of 
life. His head had stopped spinning; he took another 
great gulp of water and felt it pass smoothly through 
his gills, sending oxygen back to his brain. He 
stretched out his hands in front of him and stared at 
them. They looked green and ghostly under the water, 
and they had become webbed. He twisted around and 
looked at his bare feet — they had become elongated 
and the toes were webbed too: It looked as though he 
had sprouted flippers. 

The water didn’t feel icy anymore either ... on the 
contrary, he felt pleasantly cool and very light. ... 
Harry struck out once more, marveling at how far and 
fast his flipper-like feet propelled him through the 
water, and noticing how clearly he could see, and how 
he no longer seemed to need to blink. He had soon 
swum so far into the lake that he could no longer see 
the bottom. He flipped over and dived into its depths. 

Silence pressed upon his ears as he soared over a 
strange, dark, foggy landscape. He could only see ten 
feet around him, so that as he sped through the water 
new scenes seemed to loom suddenly out of the 
oncoming darkness: forests of rippling, tangled black 
weed, wide plains of mud littered with dull, 
glimmering stones. He swam deeper and deeper, out 
toward the middle of the lake, his eyes wide, staring 
through the eerily gray-lit water around him to the 
shadows beyond, where the water became opaque. 

Small fish flickered past him like silver darts. Once or 
twice he thought he saw something larger moving 

Page | 547 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




ahead of him, but when he got nearer, he discovered 
it to be nothing but a large, blackened log, or a dense 
clump of weed. There was no sign of any of the other 
champions, merpeople, Ron — nor, thankfully, the 
giant squid. 

Light green weed stretched ahead of him as far as he 
could see, two feet deep, like a meadow of very 
overgrown grass. Harry was staring unblinkingly 
ahead of him, trying to discern shapes through the 
gloom . . . and then, without warning, something 
grabbed hold of his ankle. 

Harry twisted his body around and saw a grindylow, a 
small, horned water demon, poking out of the weed, 
its long fingers clutched tightly around Harry’s leg, its 
pointed fangs bared — Harry stuck his webbed hand 
quickly inside his robes and fumbled for his wand. By 
the time he had grasped it, two more grindylows had 
risen out of the weed, had seized handfuls of Harry’s 
robes, and were attempting to drag him down. 

“Relashio\” Harry shouted, except that no sound came 
out. ... A large bubble issued from his mouth, and his 
wand, instead of sending sparks at the grindylows, 
pelted them with what seemed to be a jet of boiling 
water, for where it struck them, angry red patches 
appeared on their green skin. Harry pulled his ankle 
out of the grindylows grip and swam, as fast as he 
could, occasionally sending more jets of hot water 
over his shoulder at random; every now and then he 
felt one of the grindylows snatch at his foot again, 
and he kicked out, hard; finally, he felt his foot 
connect with a horned skull, and looking back, saw 
the dazed grindylow floating away, cross-eyed, while 
its fellows shook their fists at Harry and sank back 
into the weed. 



Page | 548 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry slowed down a little, slipped his wand back 
inside his robes, and looked around, listening again. 
He turned full circle in the water, the silence pressing 
harder than ever against his eardrums. He knew he 
must be even deeper in the lake now, but nothing was 
moving but the rippling weed. 

“How are you getting on?” 

Harry thought he was having a heart attack. He 
whipped around and saw Moaning Myrtle floating 
hazily in front of him, gazing at him through her 
thick, pearly glasses. 

“Myrtle!” Harry tried to shout — but once again, 
nothing came out of his mouth but a very large 
bubble. Moaning Myrtle actually giggled. 

“You want to try over there!” she said, pointing. “I 
won’t come with you. ... I don’t like them much, they 
always chase me when I get too close. ...” 

Harry gave her the thumbs-up to show his thanks 
and set off once more, careful to swim a bit higher 
over the weed to avoid any more grindylows that 
might be lurking there. 

He swam on for what felt like at least twenty minutes. 
He was passing over vast expanses of black mud now, 
which swirled murkily as he disturbed the water. 
Then, at long last, he heard a snatch of haunting 
mersong. 

“An hour long you’ll have to look, 

And to recover what we took ...” 

Harry swam faster and soon saw a large rock emerge 
out of the muddy water ahead. It had paintings of 

Page | 549 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




merpeople on it; they were carrying spears and 
chasing what looked like the giant squid. Harry swam 
on past the rock, following the mersong. 

"... your time’s half gone, so tarry not 

Lest what you seek stays here to rot. ...” 

A cluster of crude stone dwellings stained with algae 
loomed suddenly out of the gloom on all sides. Here 
and there at the dark windows, Harry saw faces ... 
faces that bore no resemblance at all to the painting 
of the mermaid in the prefects’ bathroom. ... 

The merpeople had grayish skin and long, wild, dark 
green hair. Their eyes were yellow, as were their 
broken teeth, and they wore thick ropes of pebbles 
around their necks. They leered at Harry as he swam 
past; one or two of them emerged from their caves to 
watch him better, their powerful, silver fish tails 
beating the water, spears clutched in their hands. 

Harry sped on, staring around, and soon the 
dwellings became more numerous; there were 
gardens of weed around some of them, and he even 
saw a pet grindylow tied to a stake outside one door. 
Merpeople were emerging on all sides now, watching 
him eagerly, pointing at his webbed hands and gills, 
talking behind their hands to one another. Harry sped 
around a corner and a very strange sight met his 
eyes. 

A whole crowd of merpeople was floating in front of 
the houses that lined what looked like a mer-version 
of a village square. A choir of merpeople was singing 
in the middle, calling the champions toward them, 
and behind them rose a crude sort of statue; a 
gigantic merperson hewn from a boulder. Four people 
were bound tightly to the tail of the stone merperson. 
Page | 550 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Ron was tied between Hermione and Cho Chang. 
There was also a girl who looked no older than eight, 
whose clouds of silvery hair made Harry feel sure that 
she was Fleur Delacour’s sister. All four of them 
appeared to be in a very deep sleep. Their heads were 
lolling onto their shoulders, and fine streams of 
bubbles kept issuing from their mouths. 

Harry sped toward the hostages, half expecting the 
merpeople to lower their spears and charge at him, 
but they did nothing. The ropes of weed tying the 
hostages to the statue were thick, slimy, and very 
strong. For a fleeting second he thought of the knife 
Sirius had bought him for Christmas — locked in his 
trunk in the castle a quarter of a mile away, no use to 
him whatsoever. 

He looked around. Many of the merpeople 
surrounding them were carrying spears. He swam 
swiftly toward a seven-foot-tall merman with a long 
green beard and a choker of shark fangs and tried to 
mime a request to borrow the spear. The merman 
laughed and shook his head. 

“We do not help,” he said in a harsh, croaky voice. 

“Come ON\” Harry said fiercely (but only bubbles 
issued from his mouth), and he tried to pull the spear 
away from the merman, but the merman yanked it 
back, still shaking his head and laughing. 

Harry swirled around, staring about. Something 
sharp ... anything ... 

There were rocks littering the lake bottom. He dived 
and snatched up a particularly jagged one and 
returned to the statue. He began to hack at the ropes 
binding Ron, and after several minutes’ hard work, 
they broke apart. Ron floated, unconscious, a few 
Page | 551 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




inches above the lake bottom, drifting a little in the 
ebb of the water. 

Harry looked around. There was no sign of any of the 
other champions. What were they playing at? Why 
didn’t they hurry up? He turned back to Hermione, 
raised the jagged rock, and began to hack at her 
bindings too — 

At once, several pairs of strong gray hands seized 
him. Half a dozen mermen were pulling him away 
from Hermione, shaking their green-haired heads, 
and laughing. 

“You take your own hostage,” one of them said to 
him. “Leave the others ...” 

“No way!” said Harry furiously — but only two large 
bubbles came out. 

“Your task is to retrieve your own friend . . . leave the 
others ...” 

“She’s my friend too!” Harry yelled, gesturing toward 
Hermione, an enormous silver bubble emerging 
soundlessly from his lips. “And I don’t want them to 
die either!” 

Cho’s head was on Hermione ’s shoulder; the small 
silver-haired girl was ghostly green and pale. Harry 
struggled to fight off the mermen, but they laughed 
harder than ever, holding him back. Harry looked 
wildly around. Where were the other champions? 
Would he have time to take Ron to the surface and 
come back down for Hermione and the others? Would 
he be able to find them again? He looked down at his 
watch to see how much time was left — it had 
stopped working. 



Page | 552 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




But then the merpeople around him pointed excitedly 
over his head. Harry looked up and saw Cedric 
swimming toward them. There was an enormous 
bubble around his head, which made his features 
look oddly wide and stretched. 

“Got lost!” he mouthed, looking panic-stricken. “Fleur 
and Krum’re coming now!” 

Feeling enormously relieved, Harry watched Cedric 
pull a knife out of his pocket and cut Cho free. He 
pulled her upward and out of sight. 

Harry looked around, waiting. Where were Fleur and 
Krum? Time was getting short, and according to the 
song, the hostages would be lost after an hour. . . . 

The merpeople started screeching animatedly. Those 
holding Harry loosened their grip, staring behind 
them. Harry turned and saw something monstrous 
cutting through the water toward them: a human 
body in swimming trunks with the head of a shark. . . . 
It was Krum. He appeared to have transfigured 
himself — but badly. 

The shark-man swam straight to Hermione and began 
snapping and biting at her ropes; the trouble was that 
Krum’s new teeth were positioned very awkwardly for 
biting anything smaller than a dolphin, and Harry 
was quite sure that if Krum wasn’t careful, he was 
going to rip Hermione in half. Darting forward, Harry 
hit Krum hard on the shoulder and held up the 
jagged stone. Krum seized it and began to cut 
Hermione free. Within seconds, he had done it; he 
grabbed Hermione around the waist, and without a 
backward glance, began to rise rapidly with her 
toward the surface. 



Page | 553 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Now what? Harry thought desperately. If he could be 
sure that Fleur was coming. ... But still no sign. 

There was nothing to be done except . . . 

He snatched up the stone, which Krum had dropped, 
but the mermen now closed in around Ron and the 
little girl, shaking their heads at him. Harry pulled 
out his wand. 

“Get out of the way!” 

Only bubbles flew out of his mouth, but he had the 
distinct impression that the mermen had understood 
him, because they suddenly stopped laughing. Their 
yellowish eyes were fixed upon Harry’s wand, and 
they looked scared. There might be a lot more of them 
than there were of him, but Harry could tell, by the 
looks on their faces, that they knew no more magic 
than the giant squid did. 

“You’ve got until three!” Harry shouted; a great 
stream of bubbles burst from him, but he held up 
three fingers to make sure they got the message. “One 
...” (he put down a finger) “two ...” (he put down a 
second one) — 

They scattered. Harry darted forward and began to 
hack at the ropes binding the small girl to the statue, 
and at last she was free. He seized the little girl 
around the waist, grabbed the neck of Ron’s robes, 
and kicked off from the bottom. 

It was very slow work. He could no longer use his 
webbed hands to propel himself forward; he worked 
his flippers furiously, but Ron and Fleur’s sister were 
like potato-filled sacks dragging him back down. ... 

He fixed his eyes skyward, though he knew he must 
still be very deep, the water above him was so dark. 

Page | 554 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Merpeople were rising with him. He could see them 
swirling around him with ease, watching him struggle 
through the water. ... Would they pull him back down 
to the depths when the time was up? Did they 
perhaps eat humans? Harry’s legs were seizing up 
with the effort to keep swimming; his shoulders were 
aching horribly with the effort of dragging Ron and 
the girl. ... 

He was drawing breath with extreme difficulty. He 
could feel pain on the sides of his neck again ... he 
was becoming very aware of how wet the water was in 
his mouth . . . yet the darkness was definitely thinning 
now ... he could see daylight above him. ... 

He kicked hard with his flippers and discovered that 
they were nothing more than feet . . . water was 
flooding through his mouth into his lungs ... he was 
starting to feel dizzy, but he knew light and air were 
only ten feet above him ... he had to get there ... he 
had to . . . 

Harry kicked his legs so hard and fast it felt as 
though his muscles were screaming in protest; his 
very brain felt waterlogged, he couldn’t breathe, he 
needed oxygen, he had to keep going, he could not 
stop — 

And then he felt his head break the surface of the 
lake; wonderful, cold, clear air was making his wet 
face sting; he gulped it down, feeling as though he 
had never breathed properly before, and, panting, 
pulled Ron and the little girl up with him. All around 
him, wild, green-haired heads were emerging out of 
the water with him, but they were smiling at him. 

The crowd in the stands was making a great deal of 
noise; shouting and screaming, they all seemed to be 
on their feet; Harry had the impression they thought 

Page | 555 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




that Ron and the little girl might be dead, but they 
were wrong ... both of them had opened their eyes; 
the girl looked scared and confused, but Ron merely 
expelled a great spout of water, blinked in the bright 
light, turned to Harry, and said, “Wet, this, isn’t it?” 
Then he spotted Fleur’s sister. “What did you bring 
her for?” 

“Fleur didn’t turn up, I couldn’t leave her,” Harry 
panted. 

“Harry, you prat,” said Ron, “you didn’t take that song 
thing seriously, did you? Dumbledore wouldn’t have 
let any of us drown!” 

“The song said — ” 

“It was only to make sure you got back inside the time 
limit!” said Ron. “I hope you didn’t waste time down 
there acting the hero!” 

Harry felt both stupid and annoyed. It was all very 
well for Ron; he’d been asleep, he hadn’t felt how 
eerie it was down in the lake, surrounded by spear- 
carrying merpeople who’d looked more than capable 
of murder. 

“C’mon,” Harry said shortly, “help me with her, I don’t 
think she can swim very well.” 

They pulled Fleur’s sister through the water, back 
toward the bank where the judges stood watching, 
twenty merpeople accompanying them like a guard of 
honor, singing their horrible screechy songs. 

Harry could see Madam Pomfrey fussing over 
Hermione, Krum, Cedric, and Cho, all of whom were 
wrapped in thick blankets. Dumbledore and Ludo 
Bagman stood beaming at Harry and Ron from the 

Page | 556 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




bank as they swam nearer, but Percy, who looked 
very white and somehow much younger than usual, 
came splashing out to meet them. Meanwhile 
Madame Maxime was trying to restrain Fleur 
Delacour, who was quite hysterical, fighting tooth and 
nail to return to the water. 

“Gabrielle! Gabrielle\ Is she alive ? Is she ’urt?” 

“She’s fine!” Harry tried to tell her, but he was so 
exhausted he could hardly talk, let alone shout. 

Percy seized Ron and was dragging him back to the 
bank (“Gerroff, Percy, I’m all right!”); Dumbledore and 
Bagman were pulling Harry upright; Fleur had broken 
free of Madame Maxime and was hugging her sister. 

“It was ze grindylows . . . zey attacked me ... oh 
Gabrielle, I thought ... I thought ...” 

“Come here, you,” said Madam Pomfrey. She seized 
Harry and pulled him over to Hermione and the 
others, wrapped him so tightly in a blanket that he 
felt as though he were in a straitjacket, and forced a 
measure of very hot potion down his throat. Steam 
gushed out of his ears. 

“Harry, well done!” Hermione cried. “You did it, you 
found out how all by yourself!” 

“Well — ” said Harry. He would have told her about 
Dobby, but he had just noticed Karkaroff watching 
him. He was the only judge who had not left the table; 
the only judge not showing signs of pleasure and 
relief that Harry, Ron, and Fleur’s sister had got back 
safely. “Yeah, that’s right,” said Harry, raising his 
voice slightly so that Karkaroff could hear him. 



Page | 557 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You haff a water beetle in your hair, Herm-own- 
ninny,” said Krum. Harry had the impression that 
Krum was drawing her attention back onto himself; 
perhaps to remind her that he had just rescued her 
from the lake, but Hermione brushed away the beetle 
impatiently and said, “You’re well outside the time 
limit, though, Harry. . . . Did it take you ages to find 
us?” 

“No ... I found you okay. ...” 

Harry’s feeling of stupidity was growing. Now he was 
out of the water, it seemed perfectly clear that 
Dumbledore’s safety precautions wouldn’t have 
permitted the death of a hostage just because their 
champion hadn’t turned up. Why hadn’t he just 
grabbed Ron and gone? He would have been first 
back. ... Cedric and Krum hadn’t wasted time 
worrying about anyone else; they hadn’t taken the 
mersong seriously. ... 

Dumbledore was crouching at the water’s edge, deep 
in conversation with what seemed to be the chief 
merperson, a particularly wild and ferocious-looking 
female. He was making the same sort of screechy 
noises that the merpeople made when they were 
above water; clearly, Dumbledore could speak 
Mermish. Finally he straightened up, turned to his 
fellow judges, and said, “A conference before we give 
the marks, I think.” 

The judges went into a huddle. Madam Pomfrey had 
gone to rescue Ron from Percy’s clutches; she led him 
over to Harry and the others, gave him a blanket and 
some Pepperup Potion, then went to fetch Fleur and 
her sister. Fleur had many cuts on her face and arms 
and her robes were torn, but she didn’t seem to care, 
nor would she allow Madam Pomfrey to clean them. 



Page | 558 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Look after Gabrielle,” she told her, and then she 
turned to Harry. “You saved ’er,” she said 
breathlessly. “Even though she was not your ’ostage.” 

“Yeah,” said Harry, who was now heartily wishing 
he’d left all three girls tied to the statue. 

Fleur bent down, kissed Harry twice on each cheek 
(he felt his face burn and wouldn’t have been 
surprised if steam was coming out of his ears again), 
then said to Ron, “And you too — you ’elped — ” 

“Yeah,” said Ron, looking extremely hopeful, “yeah, a 
bit — ” 



Fleur swooped down on him too and kissed him. 
Hermione looked simply furious, but just then, Ludo 
Bagman’s magically magnified voice boomed out 
beside them, making them all jump, and causing the 
crowd in the stands to go very quiet. 

“Ladies and gentlemen, we have reached our decision. 
Merchieftainess Murcus has told us exactly what 
happened at the bottom of the lake, and we have 
therefore decided to award marks out of fifty for each 
of the champions, as follows. ... 

“Fleur Delacour, though she demonstrated excellent 
use of the Bubble-Head Charm, was attacked by 
grindylows as she approached her goal, and failed to 
retrieve her hostage. We award her twenty-five 
points.” 

Applause from the stands. 

“I deserved zero,” said Fleur throatily, shaking her 
magnificent head. 



Page | 559 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Cedric Diggory, who also used the Bubble-Head 
Charm, was first to return with his hostage, though 
he returned one minute outside the time limit of an 
hour.” Enormous cheers from the Hufflepuffs in the 
crowd; Harry saw Cho give Cedric a glowing look. “We 
therefore award him forty-seven points.” 

Harry’s heart sank. If Cedric had been outside the 
time limit, he most certainly had been. 

“Viktor Krum used an incomplete form of 
Transfiguration, which was nevertheless effective, and 
was second to return with his hostage. We award him 
forty points.” 

Karkaroff clapped particularly hard, looking very 
superior. 

“Harry Potter used gillyweed to great effect,” Bagman 
continued. “He returned last, and well outside the 
time limit of an hour. However, the Merchieftainess 
informs us that Mr. Potter was first to reach the 
hostages, and that the delay in his return was due to 
his determination to return all hostages to safety, not 
merely his own.” 

Ron and Hermione both gave Harry half-exasperated, 
half-commiserating looks. 

“Most of the judges,” and here, Bagman gave 
Karkaroff a very nasty look, “feel that this shows 
moral fiber and merits full marks. However ... Mr. 
Potter’s score is forty-five points.” 

Harry’s stomach leapt — he was now tying for first 
place with Cedric. Ron and Hermione, caught by 
surprise, stared at Harry, then laughed and started 
applauding hard with the rest of the crowd. 



Page | 560 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“There you go, Harry!” Ron shouted over the noise. 
“You weren’t being thick after all — you were showing 
moral fiber!” 

Fleur was clapping very hard too, but Krum didn’t 
look happy at all. He attempted to engage Hermione 
in conversation again, but she was too busy cheering 
Harry to listen. 

“The third and final task will take place at dusk on 
the twenty-fourth of June,” continued Bagman. “The 
champions will be notified of what is coming precisely 
one month beforehand. Thank you all for your 
support of the champions.” 

It was over, Harry thought dazedly, as Madam 
Pomfrey began herding the champions and hostages 
back to the castle to get into dry clothes ... it was 
over, he had got through ... he didn’t have to worry 
about anything now until June the twenty-fourth. ... 

Next time he was in Hogsmeade, Harry decided as he 
walked back up the stone steps into the castle, he 
was going to buy Dobby a pair of socks for every day 
of the year. 



Page | 561 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






PADFOOT RETURNS 

One of the best things about the aftermath of the 
second task was that everybody was very keen to hear 
details of what had happened down in the lake, which 
meant that Ron was getting to share Harry’s limelight 
for once. Harry noticed that Ron’s version of events 
changed subtly with every retelling. At first, he gave 
what seemed to be the truth; it tallied with 
Hermione’s story, anyway — Dumbledore had put all 
the hostages into a bewitched sleep in Professor 
McGonagall’s office, first assuring them that they 
would be quite safe, and would awake when they were 
back above the water. One week later, however, Ron 
was telling a thrilling tale of kidnap in which he 
struggled single-handedly against fifty heavily armed 
merpeople who had to beat him into submission 
before tying him up. 

“But I had my wand hidden up my sleeve,” he assured 
Padma Patil, who seemed to be a lot keener on Ron 
now that he was getting so much attention and was 
making a point of talking to him every time they 



Page | 562 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



passed in the corridors. “I could’ve taken those mer- 
idiots any time I wanted.” 

“What were you going to do, snore at them?” said 
Hermione waspishly. People had been teasing her so 
much about being the thing that Viktor Krum would 
most miss that she was in a rather tetchy mood. 

Ron’s ears went red, and thereafter, he reverted to the 
bewitched sleep version of events. 

As they entered March the weather became drier, but 
cruel winds skinned their hands and faces every time 
they went out onto the grounds. There were delays in 
the post because the owls kept being blown off 
course. The brown owl that Harry had sent to Sirius 
with the dates of the Hogsmeade weekend turned up 
at breakfast on Friday morning with half its feathers 
sticking up the wrong way; Harry had no sooner torn 
off Sirius’s reply than it took flight, clearly afraid it 
was going to be sent outside again. 

Sirius’s letter was almost as short as the previous 
one. 

Be at stile at end of road out of Hogsmeade (past 
Dervish and Banges) at two o’clock on Saturday 
afternoon. Bring as much food as you can. 

“He hasn’t come back to Hogsmeade?” said Ron 
incredulously. 

“It looks like it, doesn’t it?” said Hermione. 

“I can’t believe him,” said Harry tensely, “if he’s 
caught ...” 



Page | 563 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Made it so far, though, hasn’t he?” said Ron. “And 
it’s not like the place is swarming with dementors 
anymore.” 

Harry folded up the letter, thinking. If he was honest 
with himself, he really wanted to see Sirius again. He 
therefore approached the final lesson of the afternoon 
— double Potions — feeling considerably more 
cheerful than he usually did when descending the 
steps to the dungeons. 

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle were standing in a huddle 
outside the classroom door with Pansy Parkinson’s 
gang of Slytherin girls. All of them were looking at 
something Harry couldn’t see and sniggering heartily. 
Pansy’s pug-like face peered excitedly around Goyle ’s 
broad back as Harry, Ron, and Hermione approached. 

“There they are, there they are!” she giggled, and the 
knot of Slytherins broke apart. Harry saw that Pansy 
had a magazine in her hands — Witch Weekly. The 
moving picture on the front showed a curly-haired 
witch who was smiling toothily and pointing at a large 
sponge cake with her wand. 

“You might find something to interest you in there, 
Granger!” Pansy said loudly, and she threw the 
magazine at Hermione, who caught it, looking 
startled. At that moment, the dungeon door opened, 
and Snape beckoned them all inside. 

Hermione, Harry, and Ron headed for a table at the 
back of the dungeon as usual. Once Snape had 
turned his back on them to write up the ingredients 
of today’s potion on the blackboard, Hermione hastily 
rifled through the magazine under the desk. At last, 
in the center pages, Hermione found what they were 
looking for. Harry and Ron leaned in closer. A color 
photograph of Harry headed a short piece entitled: 
Page | 564 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry Potter’s Secret Heartache 



A boy like no other, perhaps — yet a boy suffering all 
the usual pangs of adolescence, writes Rita Skeeter. 
Deprived of love since the tragic demise of his parents, 
fourteen-year-old Harry Potter thought he had found 
solace in his steady girlfriend at Hogwarts, Muggle- 
born Hermione Granger. Little did he know that he 
would shortly be suffering yet another emotional blow 
in a life already littered with personal loss. 

Miss Granger, a plain but ambitious girl, seems to 
have a taste for famous wizards that Harry alone 
cannot satisfy. Since the arrival at Hogwarts of Viktor 
Krum, Bulgarian Seeker and hero of the last World 
Quidditch Cup, Miss Granger has been toying with 
both boys’ affections. Krum, who is openly smitten 
with the devious Miss Granger, has already invited 
her to visit him in Bulgaria over the summer holidays, 
and insists that he has “never felt this way about any 
other girl.” 

However, it might not be Miss Granger’s doubtful 
natural charms that have captured these unfortunate 
boys’ interest. 

“She’s really ugly,” says Pansy Parkinson, a pretty 
and vivacious fourth-year student, “but she’d be well 
up to making a Love Potion, she’s quite brainy. I 
think that’s how she’s doing it.” 

Love Potions are, of course, banned at Hogwarts, and 
no doubt Albus Dumbledore will want to investigate 
these claims. In the meantime, Harry Potter’s well- 
wishers must hope that, next time, he bestows his 
heart on a worthier candidate. 

“I told you!” Ron hissed at Hermione as she stared 
down at the article. “I told you not to annoy Rita 

Page | 565 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Skeeter! She’s made you out to be some sort of — of 
scarlet woman!” 

Hermione stopped looking astonished and snorted 
with laughter. “ Scarlet woman?” she repeated, 
shaking with suppressed giggles as she looked 
around at Ron. 

“It’s what my mum calls them,” Ron muttered, his 
ears going red. 

“If that’s the best Rita can do, she’s losing her touch,” 
said Hermione, still giggling, as she threw Witch 
Weekly onto the empty chair beside her. “What a pile 
of old rubbish.” 

She looked over at the Slytherins, who were all 
watching her and Harry closely across the room to see 
if they had been upset by the article. Hermione gave 
them a sarcastic smile and a wave, and she, Harry, 
and Ron started unpacking the ingredients they 
would need for their Wit-Sharpening Potion. 

“There’s something funny, though,” said Hermione 
ten minutes later, holding her pestle suspended over 
a bowl of scarab beetles. “How could Rita Skeeter 
have known ... ?” 

“Known what?” said Ron quickly. “You haven’t been 
mixing up Love Potions, have you?” 

“Don’t be stupid,” Hermione snapped, starting to 
pound up her beetles again. “No, it’s just ... how did 
she know Viktor asked me to visit him over the 
summer?” 

Hermione blushed scarlet as she said this and 
determinedly avoided Ron’s eyes. 



Page | 566 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What?” said Ron, dropping his pestle with a loud 
clunk. 



“He asked me right after he’d pulled me out of the 
lake,” Hermione muttered. “After he’d got rid of his 
shark’s head. Madam Pomfrey gave us both blankets 
and then he sort of pulled me away from the judges 
so they wouldn’t hear, and he said, if I wasn’t doing 
anything over the summer, would I like to — ” 

“And what did you say?” said Ron, who had picked up 
his pestle and was grinding it on the desk, a good six 
inches from his bowl, because he was looking at 
Hermione. 

“And he did say he’d never felt the same way about 
anyone else,” Hermione went on, going so red now 
that Harry could almost feel the heat coming from 
her, “but how could Rita Skeeter have heard him? 

She wasn’t there ... or was she? Maybe she has got an 
Invisibility Cloak; maybe she sneaked onto the 
grounds to watch the second task. ...” 

“And what did you say?” Ron repeated, pounding his 
pestle down so hard that it dented the desk. 

“Well, I was too busy seeing whether you and Harry 
were okay to — ” 

“Fascinating though your social life undoubtedly is, 
Miss Granger,” said an icy voice right behind them, 
and all three of them jumped, “I must ask you not to 
discuss it in my class. Ten points from Gryffindor.” 

Snape had glided over to their desk while they were 
talking. The whole class was now looking around at 
them; Malfoy took the opportunity to flash POTTER 
STINKS across the dungeon at Harry. 



Page | 567 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Ah . . . reading magazines under the table as well?” 
Snape added, snatching up the copy of Witch Weekly. 
“A further ten points from Gryffindor ... oh but of 
course ...” Snape’s black eyes glittered as they fell on 
Rita Skeeter’s article. “Potter has to keep up with his 
press cuttings. ...” 

The dungeon rang with the Slytherins’ laughter, and 
an unpleasant smile curled Snape’s thin mouth. To 
Harry’s fury, he began to read the article aloud. 

“ ‘Harry Potter’s Secret Heartache . . . dear, dear, 

Potter, what’s ailing you now? ‘A boy like no other, 
perhaps ...’ ” 

Harry could feel his face burning. Snape was pausing 
at the end of every sentence to allow the Slytherins a 
hearty laugh. The article sounded ten times worse 
when read by Snape. Even Hermione was blushing 
scarlet now. 

“ ‘. . . Harry Potter’s well-wishers must hope that, next 
time, he bestows his heart upon a worthier candidate.’ 
How very touching,” sneered Snape, rolling up the 
magazine to continued gales of laughter from the 
Slytherins. “Well, I think I had better separate the 
three of you, so you can keep your minds on your 
potions rather than on your tangled love lives. 
Weasley, you stay here. Miss Granger, over there, 
beside Miss Parkinson. Potter — that table in front of 
my desk. Move. Now.” 

Furious, Harry threw his ingredients and his bag into 
his cauldron and dragged it up to the front of the 
dungeon to the empty table. Snape followed, sat down 
at his desk and watched Harry unload his cauldron. 
Determined not to look at Snape, Harry resumed the 
mashing of his scarab beetles, imagining each one to 
have Snape’s face. 

Page | 568 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“All this press attention seems to have inflated your 
already over-large head, Potter,” said Snape quietly, 
once the rest of the class had settled down again. 

Harry didn’t answer. He knew Snape was trying to 
provoke him; he had done this before. No doubt he 
was hoping for an excuse to take a round fifty points 
from Gryffindor before the end of the class. 

“You might be laboring under the delusion that the 
entire wizarding world is impressed with you,” Snape 
went on, so quietly that no one else could hear him 
(Harry continued to pound his scarab beetles, even 
though he had already reduced them to a very fine 
powder), “but I don’t care how many times your 
picture appears in the papers. To me, Potter, you are 
nothing but a nasty little boy who considers rules to 
be beneath him.” 

Harry tipped the powdered beetles into his cauldron 
and started cutting up his ginger roots. His hands 
were shaking slightly out of anger, but he kept his 
eyes down, as though he couldn’t hear what Snape 
was saying to him. 

“So I give you fair warning, Potter,” Snape continued 
in a softer and more dangerous voice, “pint-sized 
celebrity or not — if I catch you breaking into my 
office one more time — ” 

“I haven’t been anywhere near your office!” said Harry 
angrily, forgetting his feigned deafness. 

“Don’t lie to me,” Snape hissed, his fathomless black 
eyes boring into Harry’s. “Boomslang skin. Gillyweed. 
Both come from my private stores, and I know who 
stole them.” 



Page | 569 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry stared back at Snape, determined not to blink 
or to look guilty. In truth, he hadn’t stolen either of 
these things from Snape. Hermione had taken the 
boomslang skin back in their second year — they had 
needed it for the Polyjuice Potion — and while Snape 
had suspected Harry at the time, he had never been 
able to prove it. Dobby, of course, had stolen the 
gillyweed. 

“I don’t know what you’re talking about,” Harry lied 
coldly. 

“You were out of bed on the night my office was 
broken into!” Snape hissed. “I know it, Potter! Now, 
Mad-Eye Moody might have joined your fan club, but 
I will not tolerate your behavior! One more nighttime 
stroll into my office, Potter, and you will pay!” 

“Right,” said Harry coolly, turning back to his ginger 
roots. “I’ll bear that in mind if I ever get the urge to go 
in there.” 

Snape’s eyes flashed. He plunged a hand into the 
inside of his black robes. For one wild moment, Harry 
thought Snape was about to pull out his wand and 
curse him — then he saw that Snape had drawn out a 
small crystal bottle of a completely clear potion. Harry 
stared at it. 

“Do you know what this is, Potter?” Snape said, his 
eyes glittering dangerously again. 

“No,” said Harry, with complete honesty this time. 

“It is Veritaserum — a Truth Potion so powerful that 
three drops would have you spilling your innermost 
secrets for this entire class to hear,” said Snape 
viciously. “Now, the use of this potion is controlled by 
very strict Ministry guidelines. But unless you watch 
Page | 570 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




your step, you might just find that my hand slips” — 
he shook the crystal bottle slightly — “right over your 
evening pumpkin juice. And then, Potter ... then we’ll 
find out whether you’ve been in my office or not.” 

Harry said nothing. He turned back to his ginger 
roots once more, picked up his knife, and started 
slicing them again. He didn’t like the sound of that 
Truth Potion at all, nor would he put it past Snape to 
slip him some. He repressed a shudder at the thought 
of what might come spilling out of his mouth if Snape 
did it . . . quite apart from landing a whole lot of people 
in trouble — Hermione and Dobby for a start — there 
were all the other things he was concealing . . . like the 
fact that he was in contact with Sirius . . . and — his 
insides squirmed at the thought — how he felt about 
Cho. ... He tipped his ginger roots into the cauldron 
too, and wondered whether he ought to take a leaf out 
of Moody’s book and start drinking only from a 
private hip flask. 

There was a knock on the dungeon door. 

“Enter,” said Snape in his usual voice. 

The class looked around as the door opened. 

Professor Karkaroff came in. Everyone watched him 
as he walked up toward Snape ’s desk. He was 
twisting his finger around his goatee and looking 
agitated. 

“We need to talk,” said Karkaroff abruptly when he 
had reached Snape. He seemed so determined that 
nobody should hear what he was saying that he was 
barely opening his lips; it was as though he were a 
rather poor ventriloquist. Harry kept his eyes on his 
ginger roots, listening hard. 



Page | 571 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I’ll talk to you after my lesson, Karkaroff,” Snape 
muttered, but Karkaroff interrupted him. 

“I want to talk now, while you can’t slip off, Severus. 
You’ve been avoiding me.” 

“After the lesson,” Snape snapped. 

Under the pretext of holding up a measuring cup to 
see if he’d poured out enough armadillo bile, Harry 
sneaked a sidelong glance at the pair of them. 
Karkaroff looked extremely worried, and Snape looked 
angry. 

Karkaroff hovered behind Snape ’s desk for the rest of 
the double period. He seemed intent on preventing 
Snape from slipping away at the end of class. Keen to 
hear what Karkaroff wanted to say, Harry deliberately 
knocked over his bottle of armadillo bile with two 
minutes to go to the bell, which gave him an excuse 
to duck down behind his cauldron and mop up while 
the rest of the class moved noisily toward the door. 

“What’s so urgent?” he heard Snape hiss at Karkaroff. 

“This,” said Karkaroff, and Harry, peering around the 
edge of his cauldron, saw Karkaroff pull up the left- 
hand sleeve of his robe and show Snape something on 
his inner forearm. 

“Well?” said Karkaroff, still making every effort not to 
move his lips. “Do you see? It’s never been this clear, 
never since — ” 

“Put it away!” snarled Snape, his black eyes sweeping 
the classroom. 

“But you must have noticed — ” Karkaroff began in an 
agitated voice. 

Page | 572 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“We can talk later, Karkaroff!” spat Snape. “Potter! 
What are you doing?” 

“Clearing up my armadillo bile, Professor,” said Harry 
innocently, straightening up and showing Snape the 
sodden rag he was holding. 

Karkaroff turned on his heel and strode out of the 
dungeon. He looked both worried and angry. Not 
wanting to remain alone with an exceptionally angry 
Snape, Harry threw his books and ingredients back 
into his bag and left at top speed to tell Ron and 
Hermione what he had just witnessed. 

They left the castle at noon the next day to find a 
weak silver sun shining down upon the grounds. The 
weather was milder than it had been all year, and by 
the time they arrived in Hogsmeade, all three of them 
had taken off their cloaks and thrown them over their 
shoulders. The food Sirius had told them to bring was 
in Harry’s bag; they had sneaked a dozen chicken 
legs, a loaf of bread, and a flask of pumpkin juice 
from the lunch table. 

They went into Gladrags Wizardwear to buy a present 
for Dobby, where they had fun selecting the most 
lurid socks they could find, including a pair patterned 
with flashing gold and silver stars, and another that 
screamed loudly when they became too smelly. Then, 
at half past one, they made their way up the High 
Street, past Dervish and Banges, and out toward the 
edge of the village. 

Harry had never been in this direction before. The 
winding lane was leading them out into the wild 
countryside around Hogsmeade. The cottages were 
fewer here, and their gardens larger; they were 
walking toward the foot of the mountain in whose 
shadow Hogsmeade lay. Then they turned a corner 
Page | 573 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




and saw a stile at the end of the lane. Waiting for 
them, its front paws on the topmost bar, was a very 
large, shaggy black dog, which was carrying some 
newspapers in its mouth and looking very familiar. . . . 

“Hello, Sirius,” said Harry when they had reached 
him. 

The black dog sniffed Harry’s bag eagerly, wagged its 
tail once, then turned and began to trot away from 
them across the scrubby patch of ground that rose to 
meet the rocky foot of the mountain. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione climbed over the stile and followed. 

Sirius led them to the very foot of the mountain, 
where the ground was covered with boulders and 
rocks. It was easy for him, with his four paws, but 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione were soon out of breath. 
They followed Sirius higher, up onto the mountain 
itself. For nearly half an hour they climbed a steep, 
winding, and stony path, following Sirius’s wagging 
tail, sweating in the sun, the shoulder straps of 
Harry’s bag cutting into his shoulders. 

Then, at last, Sirius slipped out of sight, and when 
they reached the place where he had vanished, they 
saw a narrow fissure in the rock. They squeezed into 
it and found themselves in a cool, dimly lit cave. 
Tethered at the end of it, one end of his rope around a 
large rock, was Buckbeak the hippogriff. Half gray 
horse, half giant eagle, Buckbeak’s fierce orange eye 
flashed at the sight of them. All three of them bowed 
low to him, and after regarding them imperiously for a 
moment, Buckbeak bent his scaly front knees and 
allowed Hermione to rush forward and stroke his 
feathery neck. Harry, however, was looking at the 
black dog, which had just turned into his godfather. 



Page | 574 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Sirius was wearing ragged gray robes; the same ones 
he had been wearing when he had left Azkaban. His 
black hair was longer than it had been when he had 
appeared in the fire, and it was untidy and matted 
once more. He looked very thin. 

“Chicken!” he said hoarsely after removing the old 
Daily Prophets from his mouth and throwing them 
down onto the cave floor. 

Harry pulled open his bag and handed over the 
bundle of chicken legs and bread. 

“Thanks,” said Sirius, opening it, grabbing a 
drumstick, sitting down on the cave floor, and tearing 
off a large chunk with his teeth. “I’ve been living off 
rats mostly. Can’t steal too much food from 
Hogsmeade; I’d draw attention to myself.” 

He grinned up at Harry, but Harry returned the grin 
only reluctantly. 

“What’re you doing here, Sirius?” he said. 

“Fulfilling my duty as godfather,” said Sirius, gnawing 
on the chicken bone in a very doglike way. “Don’t 
worry about it, I’m pretending to be a lovable stray.” 

He was still grinning, but seeing the anxiety in 
Harry’s face, said more seriously, “I want to be on the 
spot. Your last letter ... well, let’s just say things are 
getting fishier. I’ve been stealing the paper every time 
someone throws one out, and by the looks of things, 
I’m not the only one who’s getting worried.” 

He nodded at the yellowing Daily Prophets on the cave 
floor, and Ron picked them up and unfolded them. 
Harry, however, continued to stare at Sirius. 



Page | 575 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What if they catch you? What if you’re seen?” 

“You three and Dumbledore are the only ones around 
here who know I’m an Animagus,” said Sirius, 
shrugging, and continuing to devour the chicken leg. 

Ron nudged Harry and passed him the Daily 
Prophets. There were two: The first bore the headline 
Mystery Illness of Bartemius Crouch, the second, 
Ministry Witch Still Missing — Minister of Magic Now 
Personally Involved. 

Harry scanned the story about Crouch. Phrases 
jumped out at him: hasn’t been seen in public since 
November ... house appears deserted ... St. Mungo’s 
Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries decline 
comment . . . Ministry refuses to confirm rumors of 
critical illness. . . . 

“They’re making it sound like he’s dying,” said Harry 
slowly. “But he can’t be that ill if he managed to get 
up here. ...” 

“My brother’s Crouch’s personal assistant,” Ron 
informed Sirius. “He says Crouch is suffering from 
overwork.” 

“Mind you, he did look ill, last time I saw him up 
close,” said Harry slowly, still reading the story. “The 
night my name came out of the goblet. ...” 

“Getting his comeuppance for sacking Winky, isn’t 
he?” said Hermione, an edge to her voice. She was 
stroking Buckbeak, who was crunching up Sirius’s 
chicken bones. “I bet he wishes he hadn’t done it now 
— bet he feels the difference now she’s not there to 
look after him.” 



Page | 576 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Hermione’s obsessed with house-elfs,” Ron muttered 
to Sirius, casting Hermione a dark look. Sirius, 
however, looked interested. 

“Crouch sacked his house-elf?” 

“Yeah, at the Quidditch World Cup,” said Harry, and 
he launched into the story of the Dark Mark’s 
appearance, and Winky being found with Harry’s 
wand clutched in her hand, and Mr. Crouch’s fury. 
When Harry had finished, Sirius was on his feet again 
and had started pacing up and down the cave. 

“Let me get this straight,” he said after a while, 
brandishing a fresh chicken leg. “You first saw the elf 
in the Top Box. She was saving Crouch a seat, right?” 

“Right,” said Harry, Ron, and Hermione together. 

“But Crouch didn’t turn up for the match?” 

“No,” said Harry. “I think he said he’d been too busy.” 

Sirius paced all around the cave in silence. Then he 
said, “Harry, did you check your pockets for your 
wand after you’d left the Top Box?” 

“Erm ...” Harry thought hard. “No,” he said finally. “I 
didn’t need to use it before we got in the forest. And 
then I put my hand in my pocket, and all that was in 
there were my Omnioculars.” He stared at Sirius. “Are 
you saying whoever conjured the Mark stole my wand 
in the Top Box?” 

“It’s possible,” said Sirius. 

“Winky didn’t steal that wand!” Hermione insisted. 



Page | 577 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“The elf wasn’t the only one in that box,” said Sirius, 
his brow furrowed as he continued to pace. “Who else 
was sitting behind you?” 

“Loads of people,” said Harry. “Some Bulgarian 
ministers ... Cornelius Fudge ... the Malfoys ...” 

“The Malfoys!” said Ron suddenly, so loudly that his 
voice echoed all around the cave, and Buckbeak 
tossed his head nervously. “I bet it was Lucius 
Malfoy!” 

“Anyone else?” said Sirius. 

“No one,” said Harry. 

“Yes, there was, there was Ludo Bagman,” Hermione 
reminded him. 

“Oh yeah ...” 

“I don’t know anything about Bagman except that he 
used to be Beater for the Wimbourne Wasps,” said 
Sirius, still pacing. “What’s he like?” 

“He’s okay,” said Harry. “He keeps offering to help me 
with the Triwizard Tournament.” 

“Does he, now?” said Sirius, frowning more deeply. “I 
wonder why he’d do that?” 

“Says he’s taken a liking to me,” said Harry. 

“Hmm,” said Sirius, looking thoughtful. 

“We saw him in the forest just before the Dark Mark 
appeared,” Hermione told Sirius. “Remember?” she 
said to Harry and Ron. 



Page | 578 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah, but he didn’t stay in the forest, did he?” said 
Ron. “The moment we told him about the riot, he 
went off to the campsite.” 

“How d’you know?” Hermione shot back. “How d’you 
know where he Disapparated to?” 

“Come off it,” said Ron incredulously. “Are you saying 
you reckon Ludo Bagman conjured the Dark Mark?” 

“It’s more likely he did it than Winky,” said Hermione 
stubbornly. 

“Told you,” said Ron, looking meaningfully at Sirius, 
“told you she’s obsessed with house — ” 

But Sirius held up a hand to silence Ron. 

“When the Dark Mark had been conjured, and the elf 
had been discovered holding Harry’s wand, what did 
Crouch do?” 

“Went to look in the bushes,” said Harry, “but there 
wasn’t anyone else there.” 

“Of course,” Sirius muttered, pacing up and down, “of 
course, he’d want to pin it on anyone but his own elf 
. . . and then he sacked her?” 

“Yes,” said Hermione in a heated voice, “he sacked 
her, just because she hadn’t stayed in her tent and let 
herself get trampled — ” 

“Hermione, will you give it a rest with the elf!” said 
Ron. 

Sirius shook his head and said, “She’s got the 
measure of Crouch better than you have, Ron. If you 



Page | 579 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




want to know what a man’s like, take a good look at 
how he treats his inferiors, not his equals.” 

He ran a hand over his unshaven face, evidently 
thinking hard. 

“All these absences of Barty Crouch’s ... he goes to 
the trouble of making sure his house-elf saves him a 
seat at the Quidditch World Cup, but doesn’t bother 
to turn up and watch. He works very hard to reinstate 
the Triwizard Tournament, and then stops coming to 
that too. ... It’s not like Crouch. If he’s ever taken a 
day off work because of illness before this, I’ll eat 
Buckbeak.” 

“D’you know Crouch, then?” said Harry. 

Sirius’s face darkened. He suddenly looked as 
menacing as he had the night when Harry first met 
him, the night when Harry still believed Sirius to be a 
murderer. 

“Oh I know Crouch all right,” he said quietly. “He was 
the one who gave the order for me to be sent to 
Azkaban — without a trial.” 

“What?” said Ron and Hermione together. 

“You’re kidding!” said Harry. 

“No, I’m not,” said Sirius, taking another great bite of 
chicken. “Crouch used to be Head of the Department 
of Magical Law Enforcement, didn’t you know?” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione shook their heads. 

“He was tipped for the next Minister of Magic,” said 
Sirius. “He’s a great wizard, Barty Crouch, powerfully 
magical — and power-hungry. Oh never a Voldemort 

Page | 580 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




supporter,” he said, reading the look on Harry’s face. 
“No, Barty Crouch was always very outspoken against 
the Dark Side. But then a lot of people who were 
against the Dark Side ... well, you wouldn’t 
understand ... you’re too young. ...” 

“That’s what my dad said at the World Cup,” said 
Ron, with a trace of irritation in his voice. “Try us, 
why don’t you?” 

A grin flashed across Sirius’s thin face. 

“All right, I’ll try you. ...” He walked once up the cave, 
back again, and then said, “Imagine that Voldemort’s 
powerful now. You don’t know who his supporters 
are, you don’t know who’s working for him and who 
isn’t; you know he can control people so that they do 
terrible things without being able to stop themselves. 
You’re scared for yourself, and your family, and your 
friends. Every week, news comes of more deaths, 
more disappearances, more torturing ... the Ministry 
of Magic’s in disarray, they don’t know what to do, 
they’re trying to keep everything hidden from the 
Muggles, but meanwhile, Muggles are dying too. 

Terror everywhere ... panic ... confusion ... that’s how 
it used to be. 

“Well, times like that bring out the best in some 
people and the worst in others. Crouch’s principles 
might’ve been good in the beginning — I wouldn’t 
know. He rose quickly through the Ministry, and he 
started ordering very harsh measures against 
Voldemort’s supporters. The Aurors were given new 
powers — powers to kill rather than capture, for 
instance. And I wasn’t the only one who was handed 
straight to the dementors without trial. Crouch fought 
violence with violence, and authorized the use of the 
Unforgivable Curses against suspects. I would say he 
became as ruthless and cruel as many on the Dark 
Page | 581 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Side. He had his supporters, mind you — plenty of 
people thought he was going about things the right 
way, and there were a lot of witches and wizards 
clamoring for him to take over as Minister of Magic. 
When Voldemort disappeared, it looked like only a 
matter of time until Crouch got the top job. But then 
something rather unfortunate happened. ...” Sirius 
smiled grimly. “Crouch’s own son was caught with a 
group of Death Eaters who’d managed to talk their 
way out of Azkaban. Apparently they were trying to 
find Voldemort and return him to power.” 

“Crouch’s son was caught?” gasped Hermione. 

“Yep,” said Sirius, throwing his chicken bone to 
Buckbeak, flinging himself back down on the ground 
beside the loaf of bread, and tearing it in half. “Nasty 
little shock for old Barty, I’d imagine. Should have 
spent a bit more time at home with his family, 
shouldn’t he? Ought to have left the office early once 
in a while ... gotten to know his own son.” 

He began to wolf down large pieces of bread. 

“ Was his son a Death Eater?” said Harry. 

“No idea,” said Sirius, still stuffing down bread. “I was 
in Azkaban myself when he was brought in. This is 
mostly stuff I’ve found out since I got out. The boy 
was definitely caught in the company of people I’d bet 
my life were Death Eaters — but he might have been 
in the wrong place at the wrong time, just like the 
house-elf.” 

“Did Crouch try and get his son off?” Hermione 
whispered. 

Sirius let out a laugh that was much more like a 
bark. 

Page | 582 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Crouch let his son off? I thought you had the 
measure of him, Hermione! Anything that threatened 
to tarnish his reputation had to go; he had dedicated 
his whole life to becoming Minister of Magic. You saw 
him dismiss a devoted house-elf because she 
associated him with the Dark Mark again — doesn’t 
that tell you what he’s like? Crouch’s fatherly 
affection stretched just far enough to give his son a 
trial, and by all accounts, it wasn’t much more than 
an excuse for Crouch to show how much he hated the 
boy ... then he sent him straight to Azkaban.” 

“He gave his own son to the dementors?” asked Harry 
quietly. 

“That’s right,” said Sirius, and he didn’t look remotely 
amused now. “I saw the dementors bringing him in, 
watched them through the bars in my cell door. He 
can’t have been more than nineteen. They took him 
into a cell near mine. He was screaming for his 
mother by nightfall. He went quiet after a few days, 
though . . . they all went quiet in the end . . . except 
when they shrieked in their sleep. ...” 

For a moment, the deadened look in Sirius’s eyes 
became more pronounced than ever, as though 
shutters had closed behind them. 

“So he’s still in Azkaban?” Harry said. 

“No,” said Sirius dully. “No, he’s not in there anymore. 
He died about a year after they brought him in.” 

“He died?” 

“He wasn’t the only one,” said Sirius bitterly. “Most go 
mad in there, and plenty stop eating in the end. They 
lose the will to live. You could always tell when a 
death was coming, because the dementors could 

Page | 583 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




sense it, they got excited. That boy looked pretty 
sickly when he arrived. Crouch being an important 
Ministry member, he and his wife were allowed a 
deathbed visit. That was the last time I saw Barty 
Crouch, half carrying his wife past my cell. She died 
herself, apparently, shortly afterward. Grief. Wasted 
away just like the boy. Crouch never came for his 
son’s body. The dementors buried him outside the 
fortress; I watched them do it.” 

Sirius threw aside the bread he had just lifted to his 
mouth and instead picked up the flask of pumpkin 
juice and drained it. 

“So old Crouch lost it all, just when he thought he 
had it made,” he continued, wiping his mouth with 
the back of his hand. “One moment, a hero, poised to 
become Minister of Magic . . . next, his son dead, his 
wife dead, the family name dishonored, and, so I’ve 
heard since I escaped, a big drop in popularity. Once 
the boy had died, people started feeling a bit more 
sympathetic toward the son and started asking how a 
nice young lad from a good family had gone so badly 
astray. The conclusion was that his father never 
cared much for him. So Cornelius Fudge got the top 
job, and Crouch was shunted sideways into the 
Department of International Magical Cooperation.” 

There was a long silence. Harry was thinking of the 
way Crouch’s eyes had bulged as he’d looked down at 
his disobedient house-elf back in the wood at the 
Quidditch World Cup. This, then, must have been 
why Crouch had overreacted to Winky being found 
beneath the Dark Mark. It had brought back 
memories of his son, and the old scandal, and his fall 
from grace at the Ministry. 

“Moody says Crouch is obsessed with catching Dark 
wizards,” Harry told Sirius. 

Page | 584 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah, I’ve heard it’s become a bit of a mania with 
him,” said Sirius, nodding. “If you ask me, he still 
thinks he can bring back the old popularity by 
catching one more Death Eater.” 

“And he sneaked up here to search Snape’s office!” 
said Ron triumphantly, looking at Hermione. 

“Yes, and that doesn’t make sense at all,” said Sirius. 

“Yeah, it does!” said Ron excitedly, but Sirius shook 
his head. 

“Listen, if Crouch wants to investigate Snape, why 
hasn’t he been coming to judge the tournament? It 
would be an ideal excuse to make regular visits to 
Hogwarts and keep an eye on him.” 

“So you think Snape could be up to something, then?” 
asked Harry, but Hermione broke in. 

“Look, I don’t care what you say, Dumbledore trusts 
Snape — ” 

“Oh give it a rest, Hermione,” said Ron impatiently. “I 
know Dumbledore ’s brilliant and everything, but that 
doesn’t mean a really clever Dark wizard couldn’t fool 
him — ” 



“Why did Snape save Harry’s life in the first year, 
then? Why didn’t he just let him die?” 

“I dunno — maybe he thought Dumbledore would 
kick him out — ” 

“What d’you think, Sirius?” Harry said loudly, and 
Ron and Hermione stopped bickering to listen. 



Page | 585 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I think they’ve both got a point,” said Sirius, looking 
thoughtfully at Ron and Hermione. “Ever since I 
found out Snape was teaching here, I’ve wondered 
why Dumbledore hired him. Snape ’s always been 
fascinated by the Dark Arts, he was famous for it at 
school. Slimy, oily, greasy-haired kid, he was,” Sirius 
added, and Harry and Ron grinned at each other. 
“Snape knew more curses when he arrived at school 
than half the kids in seventh year, and he was part of 
a gang of Slytherins who nearly all turned out to be 
Death Eaters.” 

Sirius held up his fingers and began ticking off 
names. 

“Rosier and Wilkes — they were both killed by Aurors 
the year before Voldemort fell. The Lestranges — 
they’re a married couple — they’re in Azkaban. Avery 

— from what I’ve heard he wormed his way out of 
trouble by saying he’d been acting under the Imperius 
Curse — he’s still at large. But as far as I know, 

Snape was never even accused of being a Death Eater 

— not that that means much. Plenty of them were 
never caught. And Snape ’s certainly clever and 
cunning enough to keep himself out of trouble.” 

“Snape knows Karkaroff pretty well, but he wants to 
keep that quiet,” said Ron. 

“Yeah, you should’ve seen Snape’s face when 
Karkaroff turned up in Potions yesterday!” said Harry 
quickly. “Karkaroff wanted to talk to Snape, he says 
Snape’s been avoiding him. Karkaroff looked really 
worried. He showed Snape something on his arm, but 
I couldn’t see what it was.” 

“He showed Snape something on his arm?” said 
Sirius, looking frankly bewildered. He ran his fingers 
distractedly through his filthy hair, then shrugged 

Page | 586 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




again. “Well, I’ve no idea what that’s about ... but if 
Karkaroff’s genuinely worried, and he’s going to 
Snape for answers ...” 

Sirius stared at the cave wall, then made a grimace of 
frustration. 

“There’s still the fact that Dumbledore trusts Snape, 
and I know Dumbledore trusts where a lot of other 
people wouldn’t, but I just can’t see him letting Snape 
teach at Hogwarts if he’d ever worked for Voldemort.” 

“Why are Moody and Crouch so keen to get into 
Snape ’s office then?” said Ron stubbornly. 

“Well,” said Sirius slowly, “I wouldn’t put it past Mad- 
Eye to have searched every single teacher’s office 
when he got to Hogwarts. He takes his Defense 
Against the Dark Arts seriously, Moody. I’m not sure 
he trusts anyone at all, and after the things he’s seen, 
it’s not surprising. I’ll say this for Moody, though, he 
never killed if he could help it. Always brought people 
in alive where possible. He was tough, but he never 
descended to the level of the Death Eaters. Crouch, 
though ... he’s a different matter ... is he really ill? If 
he is, why did he make the effort to drag himself up to 
Snape ’s office? And if he’s not ... what’s he up to? 
What was he doing at the World Cup that was so 
important he didn’t turn up in the Top Box? What’s 
he been doing while he should have been judging the 
tournament?” 

Sirius lapsed into silence, still staring at the cave 
wall. Buckbeak was ferreting around on the rocky 
floor, looking for bones he might have overlooked. 
Finally, Sirius looked up at Ron. 



Page | 587 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You say your brother’s Crouch’s personal assistant? 
Any chance you could ask him if he’s seen Crouch 
lately?” 

“I can try,” said Ron doubtfully. “Better not make it 
sound like I reckon Crouch is up to anything dodgy, 
though. Percy loves Crouch.” 

“And you might try and find out whether they’ve got 
any leads on Bertha Jorkins while you’re at it,” said 
Sirius, gesturing to the second copy of the Daily 
Prophet. 

“Bagman told me they hadn’t,” said Harry. 

“Yes, he’s quoted in the article in there,” said Sirius, 
nodding at the paper. “Blustering on about how bad 
Bertha’s memory is. Well, maybe she’s changed since 
I knew her, but the Bertha I knew wasn’t forgetful at 
all — quite the reverse. She was a bit dim, but she 
had an excellent memory for gossip. It used to get her 
into a lot of trouble; she never knew when to keep her 
mouth shut. I can see her being a bit of a liability at 
the Ministry of Magic ... maybe that’s why Bagman 
didn’t bother to look for her for so long. ...” 

Sirius heaved an enormous sigh and rubbed his 
shadowed eyes. 

“What’s the time?” 

Harry checked his watch, then remembered it hadn’t 
been working since it had spent over an hour in the 
lake. 

“It’s half past three,” said Hermione. 

“You’d better get back to school,” Sirius said, getting 
to his feet. “Now listen ...” He looked particularly hard 

Page | 588 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




at Harry. “I don’t want you lot sneaking out of school 
to see me, all right? Just send notes to me here. I still 
want to hear about anything odd. But you’re not to go 
leaving Hogwarts without permission; it would be an 
ideal opportunity for someone to attack you.” 

“No one’s tried to attack me so far, except a dragon 
and a couple of grindylows,” Harry said, but Sirius 
scowled at him. 

“I don’t care ... I’ll breathe freely again when this 
tournament’s over, and that’s not until June. And 
don’t forget, if you’re talking about me among 
yourselves, call me Snuffles, okay?” 

He handed Harry the empty napkin and flask and 
went to pat Buckbeak good-bye. “I’ll walk to the edge 
of the village with you,” said Sirius, “see if I can 
scrounge another paper.” 

He transformed into the great black dog before they 
left the cave, and they walked back down the 
mountainside with him, across the boulder-strewn 
ground, and back to the stile. Here he allowed each of 
them to pat him on the head, before turning and 
setting off at a run around the outskirts of the village. 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione made their way back into 
Hogsmeade and up toward Hogwarts. 

“Wonder if Percy knows all that stuff about Crouch?” 
Ron said as they walked up the drive to the castle. 
“But maybe he doesn’t care ... it’d probably just make 
him admire Crouch even more. Yeah, Percy loves 
rules. He’d just say Crouch was refusing to break 
them for his own son.” 

“Percy would never throw any of his family to the 
dementors,” said Hermione severely. 



Page | 589 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I don’t know,” said Ron. “If he thought we were 
standing in the way of his career . . . Percy’s really 
ambitious, you know. ...” 

They walked up the stone steps into the entrance 
hall, where the delicious smells of dinner wafted 
toward them from the Great Hall. 

“Poor old Snuffles,” said Ron, breathing deeply. “He 
must really like you, Harry. ... Imagine having to live 
off rats.” 



Page | 590 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE MADNESS OF MR. CROUCH 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione went up to the Owlery 
after breakfast on Sunday to send a letter to Percy, 
asking, as Sirius had suggested, whether he had seen 
Mr. Crouch lately. They used Hedwig, because it had 
been so long since she’d had a job. When they had 
watched her fly out of sight through the Owlery 
window, they proceeded down to the kitchen to give 
Dobby his new socks. 

The house-elves gave them a very cheery welcome, 
bowing and curtsying and bustling around making 
tea again. Dobby was ecstatic about his present. 

“Harry Potter is too good to Dobby!” he squeaked, 
wiping large tears out of his enormous eyes. 

“You saved my life with that gillyweed, Dobby, you 
really did,” said Harry. 

“No chance of more of those eclairs, is there?” said 
Ron, who was looking around at the beaming and 
bowing house-elves. 

Page | 591 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“You’ve just had breakfast!” said Hermione irritably, 
but a great silver platter of eclairs was already 
zooming toward them, supported by four elves. 

“We should get some stuff to send up to Snuffles,” 
Harry muttered. 

“Good idea,” said Ron. “Give Pig something to do. You 
couldn’t give us a bit of extra food, could you?” he 
said to the surrounding elves, and they bowed 
delightedly and hurried off to get some more. 

“Dobby, where’s Winky?” said Hermione, who was 
looking around. 

“Winky is over there by the fire, miss,” said Dobby 
quietly, his ears drooping slightly. 

“Oh dear,” said Hermione as she spotted Winky. 

Harry looked over at the fireplace too. Winky was 
sitting on the same stool as last time, but she had 
allowed herself to become so filthy that she was not 
immediately distinguishable from the smoke- 
blackened brick behind her. Her clothes were ragged 
and unwashed. She was clutching a bottle of 
butterbeer and swaying slightly on her stool, staring 
into the fire. As they watched her, she gave an 
enormous hiccup. 

“Winky is getting through six bottles a day now,” 
Dobby whispered to Harry. 

“Well, it’s not strong, that stuff,” Harry said. 

But Dobby shook his head. “ Tis strong for a house- 
elf, sir,” he said. 



Page | 592 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Winky hiccuped again. The elves who had brought the 
eclairs gave her disapproving looks as they returned 
to work. 

“Winky is pining, Harry Potter,” Dobby whispered 
sadly. “Winky wants to go home. Winky still thinks 
Mr. Crouch is her master, sir, and nothing Dobby 
says will persuade her that Professor Dumbledore is 
her master now.” 

“Hey, Winky,” said Harry, struck by a sudden 
inspiration, walking over to her, and bending down, 
“you don’t know what Mr. Crouch might be up to, do 
you? Because he’s stopped turning up to judge the 
Triwizard Tournament.” 

Winky’s eyes flickered. Her enormous pupils focused 
on Harry. She swayed slightly again and then said, “M 
— Master is stopped — hie — coming?” 

“Yeah,” said Harry, “we haven’t seen him since the 
first task. The Daily Prophet’s saying he’s ill.” 

Winky swayed some more, staring blurrily at Harry. 

“Master — hie — ill?” 

Her bottom lip began to tremble. 

“But we’re not sure if that’s true,” said Hermione 
quickly. 

“Master is needing his — hie — Winky!” whimpered 
the elf. “Master cannot — hie — manage — hie — all 
by himself. ...” 

“Other people manage to do their own housework, 
you know, Winky,” Hermione said severely. 



Page | 593 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Winky — hie — is not only — hie — doing housework 
for Mr. Crouch!” Winky squeaked indignantly, 
swaying worse than ever and slopping butterbeer 
down her already heavily stained blouse. “Master is — 
hie — trusting Winky with — hie — the most 
important — hie — the most secret — ” 

“What?” said Harry. 

But Winky shook her head very hard, spilling more 
butterbeer down herself. 

“Winky keeps — hie — her master’s secrets,” she said 
mutinously, swaying very heavily now, frowning up at 
Harry with her eyes crossed. “You is — hie — nosing, 
you is.” 

“Winky must not talk like that to Harry Potter!” said 
Dobby angrily. “Harry Potter is brave and noble and 
Harry Potter is not nosy!” 

“He is nosing — hie — into my master’s — hie — 
private and secret — hie — Winky is a good house-elf 
— hie — Winky keeps her silence — hie — people 
trying to — hie — pry and poke — hie — ” 

Winky’s eyelids drooped and suddenly, without 
warning, she slid off her stool into the hearth, snoring 
loudly. The empty bottle of butterbeer rolled away 
across the stone-flagged floor. Half a dozen house- 
elves came hurrying forward, looking disgusted. One 
of them picked up the bottle; the others covered 
Winky with a large checked tablecloth and tucked the 
ends in neatly, hiding her from view. 

“We is sorry you had to see that, sirs and miss!” 
squeaked a nearby elf, shaking his head and looking 
very ashamed. “We is hoping you will not judge us all 
by Winky, sirs and miss!” 

Page | 594 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“She’s unhappy!” said Hermione, exasperated. “Why 
don’t you try and cheer her up instead of covering her 
up?” 

“Begging your pardon, miss,” said the house-elf, 
bowing deeply again, “but house-elves has no right to 
be unhappy when there is work to be done and 
masters to be served.” 

“Oh for heaven’s sake!” Hermione cried. “Listen to me, 
all of you! You’ve got just as much right as wizards to 
be unhappy! You’ve got the right to wages and 
holidays and proper clothes, you don’t have to do 
everything you’re told — look at Dobby!” 

“Miss will please keep Dobby out of this,” Dobby 
mumbled, looking scared. The cheery smiles had 
vanished from the faces of the house-elves around the 
kitchen. They were suddenly looking at Hermione as 
though she were mad and dangerous. 

“We has your extra food!” squeaked an elf at Harry’s 
elbow, and he shoved a large ham, a dozen cakes, and 
some fruit into Harry’s arms. “Good-bye!” 

The house-elves crowded around Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione and began shunting them out of the 
kitchen, many little hands pushing in the smalls of 
their backs. 

“Thank you for the socks, Harry Potter!” Dobby called 
miserably from the hearth, where he was standing 
next to the lumpy tablecloth that was Winky. 

“You couldn’t keep your mouth shut, could you, 
Hermione?” said Ron angrily as the kitchen door 
slammed shut behind them. “They won’t want us 
visiting them now! We could’ve tried to get more stuff 
out of Winky about Crouch!” 

Page | 595 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh as if you care about that!” scoffed Hermione. “You 
only like coming down here for the food!” 

It was an irritable sort of day after that. Harry got so 
tired of Ron and Hermione sniping at each other over 
their homework in the common room that he took 
Sirius’s food up to the Owlery that evening on his 
own. 

Pigwidgeon was much too small to carry an entire 
ham up to the mountain by himself, so Harry enlisted 
the help of two school screech owls as well. When 
they had set off into the dusk, looking extremely odd 
carrying the large package between them, Harry 
leaned on the windowsill, looking out at the grounds, 
at the dark, rustling treetops of the Forbidden Forest, 
and the rippling sails of the Durmstrang ship. An 
eagle owl flew through the coil of smoke rising from 
Hagrid’s chimney; it soared toward the castle, around 
the Owlery, and out of sight. Looking down, Harry 
saw Hagrid digging energetically in front of his cabin. 
Harry wondered what he was doing; it looked as 
though he were making a new vegetable patch. As he 
watched, Madame Maxime emerged from the 
Beauxbatons carriage and walked over to Hagrid. She 
appeared to be trying to engage him in conversation. 
Hagrid leaned upon his spade, but did not seem keen 
to prolong their talk, because Madame Maxime 
returned to the carriage shortly afterward. 

Unwilling to go back to Gryffindor Tower and listen to 
Ron and Hermione snarling at each other, Harry 
watched Hagrid digging until the darkness swallowed 
him and the owls around Harry began to awake, 
swooshing past him into the night. 

By breakfast the next day Ron’s and Hermione’s bad 
moods had burnt out, and to Harry’s relief, Ron’s 
dark predictions that the house-elves would send 

Page | 596 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




substandard food up to the Gryffindor table because 
Hermione had insulted them proved false; the bacon, 
eggs, and kippers were quite as good as usual. 

When the post owls arrived, Hermione looked up 
eagerly; she seemed to be expecting something. 

“Percy won’t’ve had time to answer yet,” said Ron. “We 
only sent Hedwig yesterday.” 

“No, it’s not that,” said Hermione. “I’ve taken out a 
subscription to the Daily Prophet I’m getting sick of 
finding everything out from the Slytherins.” 

“Good thinking!” said Harry, also looking up at the 
owls. “Hey, Hermione, I think you’re in luck — ” 

A gray owl was soaring down toward Hermione. 

“It hasn’t got a newspaper, though,” she said, looking 
disappointed. “It’s — ” 

But to her bewilderment, the gray owl landed in front 
of her plate, closely followed by four barn owls, a 
brown owl, and a tawny. 

“How many subscriptions did you take out?” said 
Harry, seizing Hermione ’s goblet before it was 
knocked over by the cluster of owls, all of whom were 
jostling close to her, trying to deliver their own letter 
first. 

“What on earth — ?” Hermione said, taking the letter 
from the gray owl, opening it, and starting to read. 

“Oh really!” she sputtered, going rather red. 

“What’s up?” said Ron. 

“It’s — oh how ridiculous — ” 

Page | 597 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




She thrust the letter at Harry, who saw that it was 
not handwritten, but composed from pasted letters 
that seemed to have been cut out of the Daily Prophet. 

You are a WickEd giRL. HarRy PotTER desErves 

BeTteR. GO back wherE you cAMe from mUGgle. 

“They’re all like it!” said Hermione desperately, 
opening one letter after another. “ ‘Harry Potter can do 
much better than the likes of you. ...’ ‘You deserve to 
be boiled in frog spawn. ...’ Ouch!” 

She had opened the last envelope, and yellowish- 
green liquid smelling strongly of petrol gushed over 
her hands, which began to erupt in large yellow boils. 

“Undiluted bubotuber pus!” said Ron, picking up the 
envelope gingerly and sniffing it. 

“Ow!” said Hermione, tears starting in her eyes as she 
tried to rub the pus off her hands with a napkin, but 
her fingers were now so thickly covered in painful 
sores that it looked as though she were wearing a pair 
of thick, knobbly gloves. 

“You’d better get up to the hospital wing,” said Harry 
as the owls around Hermione took flight. “We’ll tell 
Professor Sprout where you’ve gone. ...” 

“I warned her!” said Ron as Hermione hurried out of 
the Great Hall, cradling her hands. “I warned her not 
to annoy Rita Skeeter! Look at this one ...” He read 
out one of the letters Hermione had left behind: “ ‘I 
read in Witch Weekly about how you are playing 
Harry Potter false and that boy has had enough 
hardship and I will be sending you a curse by next 



Page | 598 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




post as soon as I can find a big enough envelope.’ 
Blimey, she’d better watch out for herself.” 

Hermione didn’t turn up for Herbology. As Harry and 
Ron left the greenhouse for their Care of Magical 
Creatures class, they saw Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle 
descending the stone steps of the castle. Pansy 
Parkinson was whispering and giggling behind them 
with her gang of Slytherin girls. Catching sight of 
Harry, Pansy called, “Potter, have you split up with 
your girlfriend? Why was she so upset at breakfast?” 

Harry ignored her; he didn’t want to give her the 
satisfaction of knowing how much trouble the Witch 
Weekly article had caused. 

Hagrid, who had told them last lesson that they had 
finished with unicorns, was waiting for them outside 
his cabin with a fresh supply of open crates at his 
feet. Harry’s heart sank at the sight of the crates — 
surely not another skrewt hatching? — but when he 
got near enough to see inside, he found himself 
looking at a number of fluffy black creatures with 
long snouts. Their front paws were curiously flat, like 
spades, and they were blinking up at the class, 
looking politely puzzled at all the attention. 

“These’re nifflers,” said Hagrid, when the class had 
gathered around. “Yeh find ’em down mines mostly. 
They like sparkly stuff. ... There yeh go, look.” 

One of the nifflers had suddenly leapt up and 
attempted to bite Pansy Parkinson’s watch off her 
wrist. She shrieked and jumped backward. 

“Useful little treasure detectors,” said Hagrid happily. 
“Thought we’d have some fun with ’em today. See over 
there?” He pointed at the large patch of freshly turned 
earth Harry had watched him digging from the Owlery 

Page | 599 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




window. “I’ve buried some gold coins. I’ve got a prize 
fer whoever picks the niffler that digs up most. Jus’ 
take off all yer valuables, an’ choose a niffler, an’ get 
ready ter set ’em loose.” 

Harry took off his watch, which he was only wearing 
out of habit, as it didn’t work anymore, and stuffed it 
into his pocket. Then he picked up a niffler. It put its 
long snout in Harry’s ear and sniffed enthusiastically. 
It was really quite cuddly. 

“Hang on,” said Hagrid, looking down into the crate, 
“there’s a spare niffler here ... who’s missin’? Where’s 
Hermione?” 

“She had to go to the hospital wing,” said Ron. 

“Well explain later,” Harry muttered; Pansy 
Parkinson was listening. 

It was easily the most fun they had ever had in Care 
of Magical Creatures. The nifflers dived in and out of 
the patch of earth as though it were water, each 
scurrying back to the student who had released it and 
spitting gold into their hands. Ron’s was particularly 
efficient; it had soon filled his lap with coins. 

“Can you buy these as pets, Hagrid?” he asked 
excitedly as his niffler dived back into the soil, 
splattering his robes. 

“Yer mum wouldn’ be happy, Ron,” said Hagrid, 
grinning. “They wreck houses, nifflers. I reckon 
they’ve nearly got the lot, now,” he added, pacing 
around the patch of earth while the nifflers continued 
to dive. “I on’y buried a hundred coins. Oh there 
y’are, Hermione!” 



Page | 600 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione was walking toward them across the lawn. 
Her hands were very heavily bandaged and she looked 
miserable. Pansy Parkinson was watching her 
beadily. 

“Well, let’s check how yeh’ve done!” said Hagrid. 
“Count yer coins! An’ there’s no point tryin’ ter steal 
any, Goyle,” he added, his beetle-black eyes 
narrowed. “It’s leprechaun gold. Vanishes after a few 
hours.” 

Goyle emptied his pockets, looking extremely sulky. It 
turned out that Ron’s niffler had been most 
successful, so Hagrid gave him an enormous slab of 
Honeydukes chocolate for a prize. The bell rang 
across the grounds for lunch; the rest of the class set 
off back to the castle, but Harry, Ron, and Hermione 
stayed behind to help Hagrid put the nifflers back in 
their boxes. Harry noticed Madame Maxime watching 
them out of her carriage window. 

“What yeh done ter your hands, Hermione?” said 
Hagrid, looking concerned. 

Hermione told him about the hate mail she had 
received that morning, and the envelope full of 
bubotuber pus. 

“Aaah, don’ worry,” said Hagrid gently, looking down 
at her. “I got some o’ those letters an’ all, after Rita 
Skeeter wrote abou’ me mum. ‘Yeh’re a monster an’ 
yeh should be put down.’ ‘Yer mother killed innocent 
people an’ if you had any decency you’d jump in a 
lake. ’ ” 

“No!” said Hermione, looking shocked. 

“Yeah,” said Hagrid, heaving the niffler crates over by 
his cabin wall. “They’re jus’ nutters, Hermione. Don’ 

Page | 601 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




open ’em if yeh get any more. Chuck ’em straigh’ in 
the fire.” 



“You missed a really good lesson,” Harry told 
Hermione as they headed back toward the castle. 
“They’re good, nifflers, aren’t they, Ron?” 

Ron, however, was frowning at the chocolate Hagrid 
had given him. He looked thoroughly put out about 
something. 

“What’s the matter?” said Harry. “Wrong flavor?” 

“No,” said Ron shortly. “Why didn’t you tell me about 
the gold?” 

“What gold?” said Harry. 

“The gold I gave you at the Quidditch World Cup,” 
said Ron. “The leprechaun gold I gave you for my 
Omnioculars. In the Top Box. Why didn’t you tell me 
it disappeared?” 

Harry had to think for a moment before he realized 
what Ron was talking about. 

“Oh ...” he said, the memory coming back to him at 
last. “I dunno ... I never noticed it had gone. I was 
more worried about my wand, wasn’t I?” 

They climbed the steps into the entrance hall and 
went into the Great Hall for lunch. 

“Must be nice,” Ron said abruptly, when they had sat 
down and started serving themselves roast beef and 
Yorkshire puddings. “To have so much money you 
don’t notice if a pocketful of Galleons goes missing.” 



Page | 602 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Listen, I had other stuff on my mind that night!” said 
Harry impatiently. “We all did, remember?” 



“I didn’t know leprechaun gold vanishes,” Ron 
muttered. “I thought I was paying you back. You 
shouldn’t ’ve given me that Chudley Cannon hat for 
Christmas.” 

“Forget it, all right?” said Harry. 

Ron speared a roast potato on the end of his fork, 
glaring at it. Then he said, “I hate being poor.” 

Harry and Hermione looked at each other. Neither of 
them really knew what to say. 

“It’s rubbish,” said Ron, still glaring down at his 
potato. “I don’t blame Fred and George for trying to 
make some extra money. Wish I could. Wish I had a 
niffler.” 

“Well, we know what to get you next Christmas,” said 
Hermione brightly. Then, when Ron continued to look 
gloomy, she said, “Come on, Ron, it could be worse. 

At least your fingers aren’t full of pus.” Hermione was 
having a lot of difficulty managing her knife and fork, 
her fingers were so stiff and swollen. “I hate that 
Skeeter woman!” she burst out savagely. “I’ll get her 
back for this if it’s the last thing I do!” 



Hate mail continued to arrive for Hermione over the 
following week, and although she followed Hagrid’s 
advice and stopped opening it, several of her ill- 
wishers sent Howlers, which exploded at the 
Gryffindor table and shrieked insults at her for the 
whole Hall to hear. Even those people who didn’t read 
Witch Weekly knew all about the supposed Harry- 
Page | 603 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Krum-Hermione triangle now. Harry was getting sick 
of telling people that Hermione wasn’t his girlfriend. 

“It’ll die down, though,” he told Hermione, “if we just 
ignore it. ... People got bored with that stuff she wrote 
about me last time — ” 

“I want to know how she’s listening into private 
conversations when she’s supposed to be banned 
from the grounds!” said Hermione angrily. 

Hermione hung back in their next Defense Against 
the Dark Arts lesson to ask Professor Moody 
something. The rest of the class was very eager to 
leave; Moody had given them such a rigorous test of 
hex-deflection that many of them were nursing small 
injuries. Harry had such a bad case of Twitchy Ears, 
he had to hold his hands clamped over them as he 
walked away from the class. 

“Well, Rita’s definitely not using an Invisibility Cloak!” 
Hermione panted five minutes later, catching up with 
Harry and Ron in the entrance hall and pulling 
Harry’s hand away from one of his wiggling ears so 
that he could hear her. “Moody says he didn’t see her 
anywhere near the judges’ table at the second task, or 
anywhere near the lake!” 

“Hermione, is there any point in telling you to drop 
this?” said Ron. 

“No!” said Hermione stubbornly. “I want to know how 
she heard me talking to Viktor! And how she found 
out about Hagrid’s mum!” 

“Maybe she had you bugged,” said Harry. 

“Bugged?” said Ron blankly. “What ... put fleas on her 
or something?” 

Page | 604 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry started explaining about hidden microphones 
and recording equipment. Ron was fascinated, but 
Hermione interrupted them. 

“Aren’t you two ever going to read Hogwarts, A 
History?” 

“What’s the point?” said Ron. “You know it by heart, 
we can just ask you.” 

“All those substitutes for magic Muggles use — 
electricity, computers, and radar, and all those things 
— they all go haywire around Hogwarts, there’s too 
much magic in the air. No, Rita’s using magic to 
eavesdrop, she must be. ... If I could just find out 
what it is ... ooh, if it’s illegal, I’ll have her ...” 

“Haven’t we got enough to worry about?” Ron asked 
her. “Do we have to start a vendetta against Rita 
Skeeter as well?” 

“I’m not asking you to help!” Hermione snapped. “I’ll 
do it on my own!” 

She marched back up the marble staircase without a 
backward glance. Harry was quite sure she was going 
to the library. 

“What’s the betting she comes back with a box of / 
Hate Rita Skeeter badges?” said Ron. 

Hermione, however, did not ask Harry and Ron to 
help her pursue vengeance against Rita Skeeter, for 
which they were both grateful, because their workload 
was mounting ever higher in the days before the 
Easter holidays. Harry frankly marveled at the fact 
that Hermione could research magical methods of 
eavesdropping as well as everything else they had to 
do. He was working flat-out just to get through all 
Page | 605 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




their homework, though he made a point of sending 
regular food packages up to the cave in the mountain 
for Sirius; after last summer, Harry had not forgotten 
what it felt like to be continually hungry. He enclosed 
notes to Sirius, telling him that nothing out of the 
ordinary had happened, and that they were still 
waiting for an answer from Percy. 

Hedwig didn’t return until the end of the Easter 
holidays. Percy’s letter was enclosed in a package of 
Easter eggs that Mrs. Weasley had sent. Both Harry’s 
and Ron’s were the size of dragon eggs and full of 
homemade toffee. Hermione’s, however, was smaller 
than a chicken egg. Her face fell when she saw it. 

“Your mum doesn’t read Witch Weekly, by any 
chance, does she, Ron?” she asked quietly. 

“Yeah,” said Ron, whose mouth was full of toffee. 

“Gets it for the recipes.” 

Hermione looked sadly at her tiny egg. 

“Don’t you want to see what Percy’s written?” Harry 
asked her hastily. 

Percy’s letter was short and irritated. 

As I am constantly telling the Daily Prophet, Mr. 

Crouch is taking a well-deserved break. He is sending 
in regular owls with instructions. No, I haven’t actually 
seen him, but I think I can be trusted to know my own 
superior’s handwriting. I have quite enough to do at 
the moment without trying to quash these ridiculous 
rumors. Please don’t bother me again unless it’s 
something important. Happy Easter. 

The start of the summer term would normally have 
meant that Harry was training hard for the last 

Page | 606 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Quidditch match of the season. This year, however, it 
was the third and final task in the Triwizard 
Tournament for which he needed to prepare, but he 
still didn’t know what he would have to do. Finally, in 
the last week of May, Professor McGonagall held him 
back in Transfiguration. 

“You are to go down to the Quidditch field tonight at 
nine o’clock, Potter,” she told him. “Mr. Bagman will 
be there to tell the champions about the third task.” 

So at half past eight that night, Harry left Ron and 
Hermione in Gryffindor Tower and went downstairs. 
As he crossed the entrance hall, Cedric came up from 
the Hufflepuff common room. 

“What d’you reckon it’s going to be?” he asked Harry 
as they went together down the stone steps, out into 
the cloudy night. “Fleur keeps going on about 
underground tunnels; she reckons we’ve got to find 
treasure.” 

“That wouldn’t be too bad,” said Harry, thinking that 
he would simply ask Hagrid for a niffler to do the job 
for him. 

They walked down the dark lawn to the Quidditch 
stadium, turned through a gap in the stands, and 
walked out onto the field. 

“What’ve they done to it?” Cedric said indignantly, 
stopping dead. 

The Quidditch field was no longer smooth and flat. It 
looked as though somebody had been building long, 
low walls all over it that twisted and crisscrossed in 
every direction. 



Page | 607 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“They’re hedges!” said Harry, bending to examine the 
nearest one. 



“Hello there!” called a cheery voice. 

Ludo Bagman was standing in the middle of the field 
with Krum and Fleur. Harry and Cedric made their 
way toward them, climbing over the hedges. Fleur 
beamed at Harry as he came nearer. Her attitude 
toward him had changed completely since he had 
saved her sister from the lake. 

“Well, what d’you think?” said Bagman happily as 
Harry and Cedric climbed over the last hedge. 
“Growing nicely, aren’t they? Give them a month and 
Hagrid’ll have them twenty feet high. Don’t worry,” he 
added, grinning, spotting the less-than-happy 
expressions on Harry’s and Cedric’s faces, “you’ll have 
your Quidditch field back to normal once the task is 
over! Now, I imagine you can guess what we’re 
making here?” 

No one spoke for a moment. Then — 

“Maze,” grunted Krum. 

“That’s right!” said Bagman. “A maze. The third task’s 
really very straightforward. The Triwizard Cup will be 
placed in the center of the maze. The first champion 
to touch it will receive full marks.” 

“We seemply ’ave to get through the maze?” said 
Fleur. 

“There will be obstacles,” said Bagman happily, 
bouncing on the balls of his feet. “Hagrid is providing 
a number of creatures . . . then there will be spells that 
must be broken ... all that sort of thing, you know. 
Now, the champions who are leading on points will 
Page | 608 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




get a head start into the maze.” Bagman grinned at 
Harry and Cedric. “Then Mr. Krum will enter ... then 
Miss Delacour. But you 11 all be in with a fighting 
chance, depending how well you get past the 
obstacles. Should be fun, eh?” 

Harry, who knew only too well the kind of creatures 
that Hagrid was likely to provide for an event like this, 
thought it was unlikely to be any fun at all. However, 
he nodded politely like the other champions. 

“Very well ... if you haven’t got any questions, we’ll go 
back up to the castle, shall we, it’s a bit chilly. ...” 

Bagman hurried alongside Harry as they began to 
wend their way out of the growing maze. Harry had 
the feeling that Bagman was going to start offering to 
help him again, but just then, Krum tapped Harry on 
the shoulder. 

“Could I haff a vord?” 

“Yeah, all right,” said Harry, slightly surprised. 

“Vill you valk vith me?” 

“Okay,” said Harry curiously. 

Bagman looked slightly perturbed. 

“I’ll wait for you, Harry, shall I?” 

“No, it’s okay, Mr. Bagman,” said Harry, suppressing 
a smile, “I think I can find the castle on my own, 
thanks.” 

Harry and Krum left the stadium together, but Krum 
did not set a course for the Durmstrang ship. Instead, 
he walked toward the forest. 

Page | 609 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“What ’re we going this way for?” said Harry as they 
passed Hagrid’s cabin and the illuminated 
Beauxbatons carriage. 

“Don’t vant to be overheard,” said Krum shortly. 

When at last they had reached a quiet stretch of 
ground a short way from the Beauxbatons horses’ 
paddock, Krum stopped in the shade of the trees and 
turned to face Harry. 

“I vant to know,” he said, glowering, “vot there is 
between you and Hermy-own-ninny.” 

Harry, who from Krum’s secretive manner had 
expected something much more serious than this, 
stared up at Krum in amazement. 

“Nothing,” he said. But Krum glowered at him, and 
Harry, somehow struck anew by how tall Krum was, 
elaborated. “We’re friends. She’s not my girlfriend and 
she never has been. It’s just that Skeeter woman 
making things up.” 

“Hermy-own-ninny talks about you very often,” said 
Krum, looking suspiciously at Harry. 

“Yeah,” said Harry, “because we’re friends.” 

He couldn’t quite believe he was having this 
conversation with Viktor Krum, the famous 
International Quidditch player. It was as though the 
eighteen-year-old Krum thought he, Harry, was an 
equal — a real rival — 

“You haff never ... you haff not ...” 

“No,” said Harry very firmly. 



Page | 610 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Krum looked slightly happier. He stared at Harry for a 
few seconds, then said, “You fly very veil. I vos 
votching at the first task.” 

“Thanks,” said Harry, grinning broadly and suddenly 
feeling much taller himself. “I saw you at the 
Quidditch World Cup. The Wronski Feint, you really 



But something moved behind Krum in the trees, and 
Harry, who had some experience of the sort of thing 
that lurked in the forest, instinctively grabbed Krum’s 
arm and pulled him around. 

“Vot is it?” 

Harry shook his head, staring at the place where he’d 
seen movement. He slipped his hand inside his robes, 
reaching for his wand. 

Suddenly a man staggered out from behind a tall oak. 
For a moment, Harry didn’t recognize him ... then he 
realized it was Mr. Crouch. 

He looked as though he had been traveling for days. 
The knees of his robes were ripped and bloody, his 
face scratched; he was unshaven and gray with 
exhaustion. His neat hair and mustache were both in 
need of a wash and a trim. His strange appearance, 
however, was nothing to the way he was behaving. 
Muttering and gesticulating, Mr. Crouch appeared to 
be talking to someone that he alone could see. He 
reminded Harry vividly of an old tramp he had seen 
once when out shopping with the Dursleys. That man 
too had been conversing wildly with thin air; Aunt 
Petunia had seized Dudley’s hand and pulled him 
across the road to avoid him; Uncle Vernon had then 
treated the family to a long rant about what he would 
like to do with beggars and vagrants. 

Page | 611 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




“Vosn’t he a judge?” said Krum, staring at Mr. 

Crouch. “Isn’t he vith your Ministry?” 

Harry nodded, hesitated for a moment, then walked 
slowly toward Mr. Crouch, who did not look at him, 
but continued to talk to a nearby tree. 

"... and when you’ve done that, Weatherby, send an 
owl to Dumbledore confirming the number of 
Durmstrang students who will be attending the 
tournament, Karkaroff has just sent word there will 
be twelve. ...” 

“Mr. Crouch?” said Harry cautiously. 

"... and then send another owl to Madame Maxime, 
because she might want to up the number of 
students she’s bringing, now Karkaroff’s made it a 
round dozen ... do that, Weatherby, will you? Will 
you? Will...” 

Mr. Crouch’s eyes were bulging. He stood staring at 
the tree, muttering soundlessly at it. Then he 
staggered sideways and fell to his knees. 

“Mr. Crouch?” Harry said loudly. “Are you all right?” 

Crouch’s eyes were rolling in his head. Harry looked 
around at Krum, who had followed him into the trees, 
and was looking down at Crouch in alarm. 

“Vot is wrong with him?” 

“No idea,” Harry muttered. “Listen, you’d better go 
and get someone — ” 

“Dumbledore!” gasped Mr. Crouch. He reached out 
and seized a handful of Harry’s robes, dragging him 



Page | 612 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




closer, though his eyes were staring over Harry’s 
head. “I need ... see ... Dumbledore. ...” 

“Okay,” said Harry, “if you get up, Mr. Crouch, we can 
go up to the — ” 

“I’ve done ... stupid ... thing ...” Mr. Crouch breathed. 
He looked utterly mad. His eyes were rolling and 
bulging, and a trickle of spittle was sliding down his 
chin. Every word he spoke seemed to cost him a 
terrible effort. “Must ... tell ... Dumbledore ...” 

“Get up, Mr. Crouch,” said Harry loudly and clearly. 
“Get up, I’ll take you to Dumbledore!” 

Mr. Crouch’s eyes rolled forward onto Harry. 

“Who ... you?” he whispered. 

“I’m a student at the school,” said Harry, looking 
around at Krum for some help, but Krum was 
hanging back, looking extremely nervous. 

“You’re not ... his?” whispered Crouch, his mouth 
sagging. 

“No,” said Harry, without the faintest idea what 
Crouch was talking about. 

“Dumbledore ’s?” 

“That’s right,” said Harry. 

Crouch was pulling him closer; Harry tried to loosen 
Crouch’s grip on his robes, but it was too powerful. 

“Warn ... Dumbledore ...” 



Page | 613 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I’ll get Dumbledore if you let go of me,” said Harry. 
“Just let go, Mr. Crouch, and I’ll get him. ...” 

“Thank you, Weatherby, and when you have done 
that, I would like a cup of tea. My wife and son will be 
arriving shortly, we are attending a concert tonight 
with Mr. and Mrs. Fudge.” 

Crouch was now talking fluently to a tree again, and 
seemed completely unaware that Harry was there, 
which surprised Harry so much he didn’t notice that 
Crouch had released him. 

“Yes, my son has recently gained twelve O.W.L.s, 
most satisfactory, yes, thank you, yes, very proud 
indeed. Now, if you could bring me that memo from 
the Andorran Minister of Magic, I think I will have 
time to draft a response. ...” 

“You stay here with him!” Harry said to Krum. “I’ll get 
Dumbledore, I’ll be quicker, I know where his office is 



“He is mad,” said Krum doubtfully, staring down at 
Crouch, who was still gabbling to the tree, apparently 
convinced it was Percy. 

“Just stay with him,” said Harry, starting to get up, 
but his movement seemed to trigger another abrupt 
change in Mr. Crouch, who seized him hard around 
the knees and pulled Harry back to the ground. 

“Don’t ... leave ... me!” he whispered, his eyes bulging 
again. “I ... escaped . . . must warn . . . must tell . . . see 
Dumbledore . . . my fault ... all my fault . . . Bertha . . . 
dead ... all my fault . . . my son . . . my fault . . . tell 
Dumbledore . . . Harry Potter . . . the Dark Lord . . . 
stronger ... Harry Potter ...” 



Page | 614 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I’ll get Dumbledore if you let me go, Mr. Crouch!” 
said Harry. He looked furiously around at Krum. 

“Help me, will you?” 

Looking extremely apprehensive, Krum moved 
forward and squatted down next to Mr. Crouch. 

“Just keep him here,” said Harry, pulling himself free 
of Mr. Crouch. “I’ll be back with Dumbledore.” 

“Hurry, von’t you?” Krum called after him as Harry 
sprinted away from the forest and up through the 
dark grounds. They were deserted; Bagman, Cedric, 
and Fleur had disappeared. Harry tore up the stone 
steps, through the oak front doors, and off up the 
marble staircase, toward the second floor. 

Five minutes later he was hurtling toward a stone 
gargoyle standing halfway along an empty corridor. 

“Sher — sherbet lemon!” he panted at it. 

This was the password to the hidden staircase to 
Dumbledore ’s office — or at least, it had been two 
years ago. The password had evidently changed, 
however, for the stone gargoyle did not spring to life 
and jump aside, but stood frozen, glaring at Harry 
malevolently. 

“Move!” Harry shouted at it. “C’mon!” 

But nothing at Hogwarts had ever moved just because 
he shouted at it; he knew it was no good. He looked 
up and down the dark corridor. Perhaps Dumbledore 
was in the staffroom? He started running as fast as 
he could toward the staircase — 

“POTTER!” 



Page | 615 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry skidded to a halt and looked around. Snape 
had just emerged from the hidden staircase behind 
the stone gargoyle. The wall was sliding shut behind 
him even as he beckoned Harry back toward him. 

“What are you doing here, Potter?” 

“I need to see Professor Dumbledore!” said Harry, 
running back up the corridor and skidding to a 
standstill in front of Snape instead. “It’s Mr. Crouch 
... he’s just turned up ... he’s in the forest ... he’s 
asking — ” 

“What is this rubbish?” said Snape, his black eyes 
glittering. “What are you talking about?” 

“Mr. Crouch!” Harry shouted. “From the Ministry! 

He’s ill or something — he’s in the forest, he wants to 
see Dumbledore! Just give me the password up to — ” 

“The headmaster is busy, Potter,” said Snape, his thin 
mouth curling into an unpleasant smile. 

“I’ve got to tell Dumbledore!” Harry yelled. 

“Didn’t you hear me, Potter?” 

Harry could tell Snape was thoroughly enjoying 
himself, denying Harry the thing he wanted when he 
was so panicky. 

“Look,” said Harry angrily, “Crouch isn’t right — he’s 
— he’s out of his mind — he says he wants to warn — 



The stone wall behind Snape slid open. Dumbledore 
was standing there, wearing long green robes and a 
mildly curious expression. “Is there a problem?” he 
said, looking between Harry and Snape. 

Page | 616 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Professor!” Harry said, sidestepping Snape before 
Snape could speak, “Mr. Crouch is here — he’s down 
in the forest, he wants to speak to you!” 

Harry expected Dumbledore to ask questions, but to 
his relief, Dumbledore did nothing of the sort. 

“Lead the way,” he said promptly, and he swept off 
along the corridor behind Harry, leaving Snape 
standing next to the gargoyle and looking twice as 
ugly. 

“What did Mr. Crouch say, Harry?” said Dumbledore 
as they walked swiftly down the marble staircase. 

“Said he wants to warn you ... said he’s done 
something terrible ... he mentioned his son . . . and 
Bertha Jorkins ... and — and Voldemort ... something 
about Voldemort getting stronger. ...” 

“Indeed,” said Dumbledore, and he quickened his 
pace as they hurried out into the pitch-darkness. 

“He’s not acting normally,” Harry said, hurrying along 
beside Dumbledore. “He doesn’t seem to know where 
he is. He keeps talking like he thinks Percy Weasley’s 
there, and then he changes, and says he needs to see 
you. ... I left him with Viktor Krum.” 

“You did?” said Dumbledore sharply, and he began to 
take longer strides still, so that Harry was running to 
keep up. “Do you know if anybody else saw Mr. 
Crouch?” 

“No,” said Harry. “Krum and I were talking, Mr. 
Bagman had just finished telling us about the third 
task, we stayed behind, and then we saw Mr. Crouch 
coming out of the forest — ” 



Page | 617 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Where are they?” said Dumbledore as the 
Beauxbatons carriage emerged from the darkness. 

“Over here,” said Harry, moving in front of 
Dumbledore, leading the way through the trees. He 
couldn’t hear Crouch’s voice anymore, but he knew 
where he was going; it hadn’t been much past the 
Beauxbatons carriage ... somewhere around here. ... 

“Viktor?” Harry shouted. 

No one answered. 

“They were here,” Harry said to Dumbledore. “They 
were definitely somewhere around here. ...” 

“Lumos,” Dumbledore said, lighting his wand and 
holding it up. 

Its narrow beam traveled from black trunk to black 
trunk, illuminating the ground. And then it fell upon 
a pair of feet. 

Harry and Dumbledore hurried forward. Krum was 
sprawled on the forest floor. He seemed to be 
unconscious. There was no sign at all of Mr. Crouch. 
Dumbledore bent over Krum and gently lifted one of 
his eyelids. 

“Stunned,” he said softly. His half-moon glasses 
glittered in the wandlight as he peered around at the 
surrounding trees. 

“Should I go and get someone?” said Harry. “Madam 
Pomfrey?” 

“No,” said Dumbledore swiftly. “Stay here.” 



Page | 618 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He raised his wand into the air and pointed it in the 
direction of Hagrid ’s cabin. Harry saw something 
silvery dart out of it and streak away through the 
trees like a ghostly bird. Then Dumbledore bent over 
Krum again, pointed his wand at him, and muttered, 
“Renneruate.” 

Krum opened his eyes. He looked dazed. When he saw 
Dumbledore, he tried to sit up, but Dumbledore put a 
hand on his shoulder and made him lie still. 

“He attacked me!” Krum muttered, putting a hand up 
to his head. “The old madman attacked me! I vos 
looking around to see vare Potter had gone and he 
attacked from behind!” 

“Lie still for a moment,” Dumbledore said. 

The sound of thunderous footfalls reached them, and 
Hagrid came panting into sight with Fang at his 
heels. He was carrying his crossbow. 

“Professor Dumbledore!” he said, his eyes widening. 
“Harry — what the — ?” 

“Hagrid, I need you to fetch Professor Karkaroff,” said 
Dumbledore. “His student has been attacked. When 
you’ve done that, kindly alert Professor Moody — ” 

“No need, Dumbledore,” said a wheezy growl. “I’m 
here.” 

Moody was limping toward them, leaning on his staff, 
his wand lit. 

“Damn leg,” he said furiously. “Would’ve been here 
quicker ... what’s happened? Snape said something 
about Crouch — ” 



Page | 619 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Crouch?” said Hagrid blankly. 

“Karkaroff, please, Hagrid!” said Dumbledore sharply. 

“Oh yeah ... right y’are, Professor ...” said Hagrid, and 
he turned and disappeared into the dark trees, Fang 
trotting after him. 

“I don’t know where Barty Crouch is,” Dumbledore 
told Moody, “but it is essential that we find him.” 

“I’m onto it,” growled Moody, and he pulled out his 
wand and limped off into the forest. 

Neither Dumbledore nor Harry spoke again until they 
heard the unmistakable sounds of Hagrid and Fang 
returning. Karkaroff was hurrying along behind them. 
He was wearing his sleek silver furs, and he looked 
pale and agitated. 

“What is this?” he cried when he saw Krum on the 
ground and Dumbledore and Harry beside him. 
“What’s going on?” 

“I vos attacked!” said Krum, sitting up now and 
rubbing his head. “Mr. Crouch or votever his name — 



“Crouch attacked you? Crouch attacked you? The 
Triwizard judge?” 

“Igor,” Dumbledore began, but Karkaroff had drawn 
himself up, clutching his furs around him, looking 
livid. 

“Treachery!” he bellowed, pointing at Dumbledore. “It 
is a plot! You and your Ministry of Magic have lured 
me here under false pretenses, Dumbledore! This is 
not an equal competition! First you sneak Potter into 

Page | 620 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the tournament, though he is underage! Now one of 
your Ministry friends attempts to put my champion 
out of action! I smell double-dealing and corruption in 
this whole affair, and you, Dumbledore, you, with 
your talk of closer international wizarding links, of 
rebuilding old ties, of forgetting old differences — 
here’s what I think of you!” 

Karkaroff spat onto the ground at Dumbledore’s feet. 
In one swift movement, Hagrid seized the front of 
Karkaroff’s furs, lifted him into the air, and slammed 
him against a nearby tree. 

“Apologize!” Hagrid snarled as Karkaroff gasped for 
breath, Hagrid’s massive fist at his throat, his feet 
dangling in midair. 

“Hagrid, no\” Dumbledore shouted, his eyes flashing. 

Hagrid removed the hand pinning Karkaroff to the 
tree, and Karkaroff slid all the way down the trunk 
and slumped in a huddle at its roots; a few twigs and 
leaves showered down upon his head. 

“Kindly escort Harry back up to the castle, Hagrid,” 
said Dumbledore sharply. 

Breathing heavily, Hagrid gave Karkaroff a glowering 
look. 

“Maybe I’d better stay here, Headmaster. ...” 

“You will take Harry back to school, Hagrid,” 
Dumbledore repeated firmly. “Take him right up to 
Gryffindor Tower. And Harry — I want you to stay 
there. Anything you might want to do — any owls you 
might want to send — they can wait until morning, do 
you understand me?” 



Page | 621 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Er — yes,” said Harry, staring at him. How had 
Dumbledore known that, at that very moment, he had 
been thinking about sending Pigwidgeon straight to 
Sirius, to tell him what had happened? 

“Ill leave Fang with yeh, Headmaster,” Hagrid said, 
staring menacingly at Karkaroff, who was still 
sprawled at the foot of the tree, tangled in furs and 
tree roots. “Stay, Fang. C’mon, Harry.” 

They marched in silence past the Beauxbatons 
carriage and up toward the castle. 

“How dare he,” Hagrid growled as they strode past the 
lake. “How dare he accuse Dumbledore. Like 
Dumbledore ’d do anythin’ like that. Like Dumbledore 
wanted you in the tournament in the firs’ place. 
Worried! I dunno when I seen Dumbledore more 
worried than he’s bin lately. An’ you!” Hagrid 
suddenly said angrily to Harry, who looked up at him, 
taken aback. “What were yeh doin’, wanderin’ off with 
ruddy Krum? He’s from Durmstrang, Harry! Coulda 
jinxed yeh right there, couldn’ he? Hasn’ Moody 
taught yeh nothin’? ’Magine lettin’ him lure yeh off on 
yer own — ” 

“Krum’s all right!” said Harry as they climbed the 
steps into the entrance hall. “He wasn’t trying to jinx 
me, he just wanted to talk about Hermione — ” 

“I’ll be havin’ a few words with her, an’ all,” said 
Hagrid grimly, stomping up the stairs. “The less you 
lot ’ave ter do with these foreigners, the happier yeh’ll 
be. Yeh can’ trust any of ’em.” 

“You were getting on all right with Madame Maxime,” 
Harry said, annoyed. 



Page | 622 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’ you talk ter me abou’ her!” said Hagrid, and he 
looked quite frightening for a moment. “I’ve got her 
number now! Tryin’ ter get back in me good books, 
tryin’ ter get me ter tell her what’s cornin’ in the third 
task. Ha! You can’ trust any of ’em!” 

Hagrid was in such a bad mood, Harry was quite glad 
to say good-bye to him in front of the Fat Lady. He 
clambered through the portrait hole into the common 
room and hurried straight for the corner where Ron 
and Hermione were sitting, to tell them what had 
happened. 



Page | 623 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




z? 




THE DREAM 

“It comes down to this,” said Hermione, rubbing her 
forehead. “Either Mr. Crouch attacked Viktor, or 
somebody else attacked both of them when Viktor 
wasn’t looking.” 

“It must’ve been Crouch,” said Ron at once. “That’s 
why he was gone when Harry and Dumbledore got 
there. He’d done a runner.” 

“I don’t think so,” said Harry, shaking his head. “He 
seemed really weak — I don’t reckon he was up to 
Disapparating or anything.” 

“You can’t Disapparate on the Hogwarts grounds, 
haven’t I told you enough times?” said Hermione. 

“Okay ... how’s this for a theory,” said Ron excitedly. 
“Krum attacked Crouch — no, wait for it — and then 
Stunned himself!” 

“And Mr. Crouch evaporated, did he?” said Hermione 
coldly. 

Page | 624 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“Oh yeah ...” 



It was daybreak. Harry, Ron, and Hermione had crept 
out of their dormitories very early and hurried up to 
the Owlery together to send a note to Sirius. Now they 
were standing looking out at the misty grounds. All 
three of them were puffy-eyed and pale because they 
had been talking late into the night about Mr. 

Crouch. 

“Just go through it again, Harry,” said Hermione. 
“What did Mr. Crouch actually say?” 

“I’ve told you, he wasn’t making much sense,” said 
Harry. “He said he wanted to warn Dumbledore about 
something. He definitely mentioned Bertha Jorkins, 
and he seemed to think she was dead. He kept saying 
stuff was his fault. ... He mentioned his son.” 

“Well, that was his fault,” said Hermione testily. 

“He was out of his mind,” said Harry. “Half the time 
he seemed to think his wife and son were still alive, 
and he kept talking to Percy about work and giving 
him instructions.” 

“And ... remind me what he said about You-Know- 
Who?” said Ron tentatively. 

“I’ve told you,” Harry repeated dully. “He said he’s 
getting stronger.” 

There was a pause. Then Ron said in a falsely 
confident voice, “But he was out of his mind, like you 
said, so half of it was probably just raving. ...” 

“He was sanest when he was trying to talk about 
Voldemort,” said Harry, and Ron winced at the sound 
of the name. “He was having real trouble stringing 

Page | 625 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




two words together, but that was when he seemed to 
know where he was, and know what he wanted to do. 
He just kept saying he had to see Dumbledore.” 

Harry turned away from the window and stared up 
into the rafters. The many perches were half-empty; 
every now and then, another owl would swoop in 
through one of the windows, returning from its night’s 
hunting with a mouse in its beak. 

“If Snape hadn’t held me up,” Harry said bitterly, “we 
might’ve got there in time. The headmaster is busy, 
Potter ... what’s this rubbish, Potter?’ Why couldn’t he 
have just got out of the way?” 

“Maybe he didn’t want you to get there!” said Ron 
quickly. “Maybe — hang on — how fast d’you reckon 
he could’ve gotten down to the forest? D’you reckon 
he could’ve beaten you and Dumbledore there?” 

“Not unless he can turn himself into a bat or 
something,” said Harry. 

“Wouldn’t put it past him,” Ron muttered. 

“We need to see Professor Moody,” said Hermione. 

“We need to find out whether he found Mr. Crouch.” 

“If he had the Marauder’s Map on him, it would’ve 
been easy,” said Harry. 

“Unless Crouch was already outside the grounds,” 
said Ron, “because it only shows up to the 
boundaries, doesn’t — ” 

“Shh!” said Hermione suddenly. 



Page | 626 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Somebody was climbing the steps up to the Owlery. 
Harry could hear two voices arguing, coming closer 
and closer. 

“ — that’s blackmail, that is, we could get into a lot of 
trouble for that — ” 

“ — we’ve tried being polite; it’s time to play dirty, like 
him. He wouldn’t like the Ministry of Magic knowing 
what he did — ” 

“I’m telling you, if you put that in writing, it’s 
blackmail!” 

“Yeah, and you won’t be complaining if we get a nice 
fat payoff, will you?” 

The Owlery door banged open. Fred and George came 
over the threshold, then froze at the sight of Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione. 

“What’re you doing here?” Ron and Fred said at the 
same time. 

“Sending a letter,” said Harry and George in unison. 
“What, at this time?” said Hermione and Fred. 

Fred grinned. 

“Fine — we won’t ask you what you’re doing, if you 
don’t ask us,” he said. 

He was holding a sealed envelope in his hands. Harry 
glanced at it, but Fred, whether accidentally or on 
purpose, shifted his hand so that the name on it was 
covered. 



Page | 627 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, don’t let us hold you up,” Fred said, making a 
mock bow and pointing at the door. 

Ron didn’t move. “Who’re you blackmailing?” he said. 

The grin vanished from Fred’s face. Harry saw George 
half glance at Fred, before smiling at Ron. 

“Don’t be stupid, I was only joking,” he said easily. 

“Didn’t sound like that,” said Ron. 

Fred and George looked at each other. Then Fred said 
abruptly, “I’ve told you before, Ron, keep your nose 
out if you like it the shape it is. Can’t see why you 
would, but — ” 

“It’s my business if you’re blackmailing someone,” 
said Ron. “George’s right, you could end up in serious 
trouble for that.” 

“Told you, I was joking,” said George. He walked over 
to Fred, pulled the letter out of his hands, and began 
attaching it to the leg of the nearest barn owl. “You’re 
starting to sound a bit like our dear older brother, 
you are, Ron. Carry on like this and you’ll be made a 
prefect.” 

“No, I won’t!” said Ron hotly. 

George carried the barn owl over to the window and it 
took off. George turned around and grinned at Ron. 

“Well, stop telling people what to do then. See you 
later.” 

He and Fred left the Owlery. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione stared at one another. 



Page | 628 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You don’t think they know something about all this, 
do you?” Hermione whispered. “About Crouch and 
everything?” 

“No,” said Harry. “If it was something that serious, 
they’d tell someone. They’d tell Dumbledore.” 

Ron, however, was looking uncomfortable. 

“What’s the matter?” Hermione asked him. 

“Well ...” said Ron slowly, “I dunno if they would. 
They’re ... they’re obsessed with making money lately, 

I noticed it when I was hanging around with them — 
when — you know — ” 

“We weren’t talking.” Harry finished the sentence for 
him. “Yeah, but blackmail ...” 

“It’s this joke shop idea they’ve got,” said Ron. “I 
thought they were only saying it to annoy Mum, but 
they really mean it, they want to start one. They’ve 
only got a year left at Hogwarts, they keep going on 
about how it’s time to think about their future, and 
Dad can’t help them, and they need gold to get 
started.” 

Hermione was looking uncomfortable now. 

“Yes, but ... they wouldn’t do anything against the law 
to get gold.” 

“Wouldn’t they?” said Ron, looking skeptical. “I dunno 
... they don’t exactly mind breaking rules, do they?” 

“Yes, but this is the law,” said Hermione, looking 
scared. “This isn’t some silly school rule. ... They’ll get 
a lot more than detention for blackmail! Ron ... maybe 
you’d better tell Percy. ...” 

Page | 629 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Are you mad?” said Ron. “Tell Percy? He’d probably 
do a Crouch and turn them in.” He stared at the 
window through which Fred and Georges owl had 
departed, then said, “Come on, let’s get some 
breakfast.” 

“D’you think it’s too early to go and see Professor 
Moody?” Hermione said as they went down the spiral 
staircase. 

“Yes,” said Harry. “He’d probably blast us through the 
door if we wake him at the crack of dawn; he’ll think 
we’re trying to attack him while he’s asleep. Let’s give 
it till break.” 

History of Magic had rarely gone so slowly. Harry kept 
checking Ron’s watch, having finally discarded his 
own, but Ron’s was moving so slowly he could have 
sworn it had stopped working too. All three of them 
were so tired they could happily have put their heads 
down on the desks and slept; even Hermione wasn’t 
taking her usual notes, but was sitting with her head 
on her hand, gazing at Professor Binns with her eyes 
out of focus. 

When the bell finally rang, they hurried out into the 
corridors toward the Dark Arts classroom and found 
Professor Moody leaving it. He looked as tired as they 
felt. The eyelid of his normal eye was drooping, giving 
his face an even more lopsided appearance than 
usual. 

“Professor Moody?” Harry called as they made their 
way toward him through the crowd. 

“Hello, Potter,” growled Moody. His magical eye 
followed a couple of passing first years, who sped up, 
looking nervous; it rolled into the back of Moody’s 



Page | 630 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




head and watched them around the corner before he 
spoke again. 



“Come in here.” 

He stood back to let them into his empty classroom, 
limped in after them, and closed the door. 

“Did you find him?” Harry asked without preamble. 
“Mr. Crouch?” 

“No,” said Moody. He moved over to his desk, sat 
down, stretched out his wooden leg with a slight 
groan, and pulled out his hip flask. 

“Did you use the map?” Harry said. 

“Of course,” said Moody, taking a swig from his flask. 
“Took a leaf out of your book, Potter. Summoned it 
from my office into the forest. He wasn’t anywhere on 
there.” 

“So he did Disapparate?” said Ron. 

“You can’t Disapparate on the grounds, Ron\” said 
Hermione. “There are other ways he could have 
disappeared, aren’t there, Professor?” 

Moody’s magical eye quivered as it rested on 
Hermione. “You’re another one who might think about 
a career as an Auror,” he told her. “Mind works the 
right way, Granger.” 

Hermione flushed pink with pleasure. 

“Well, he wasn’t invisible,” said Harry. “The map 
shows invisible people. He must’ve left the grounds, 
then.” 

Page | 631 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“But under his own steam?” said Hermione eagerly, 

“or because someone made him?” 

“Yeah, someone could’ve — could’ve pulled him onto a 
broom and flown off with him, couldn’t they?” said 
Ron quickly, looking hopefully at Moody as if he too 
wanted to be told he had the makings of an Auror. 

“We can’t rule out kidnap,” growled Moody. 

“So,” said Ron, “d’you reckon he’s somewhere in 
Hogsmeade?” 

“Could be anywhere,” said Moody, shaking his head. 
“Only thing we know for sure is that he’s not here.” 

He yawned widely, so that his scars stretched, and 
his lopsided mouth revealed a number of missing 
teeth. Then he said, “Now, Dumbledore’s told me you 
three fancy yourselves as investigators, but there’s 
nothing you can do for Crouch. The Ministry’ll be 
looking for him now, Dumbledore’s notified them. 
Potter, you just keep your mind on the third task.” 

“What?” said Harry. “Oh yeah ...” 

He hadn’t given the maze a single thought since he’d 
left it with Krum the previous night. 

“Should be right up your street, this one,” said 
Moody, looking up at Harry and scratching his 
scarred and stubbly chin. “From what Dumbledore’s 
said, you’ve managed to get through stuff like this 
plenty of times. Broke your way through a series of 
obstacles guarding the Sorcerer’s Stone in your first 
year, didn’t you?” 

“We helped,” Ron said quickly. “Me and Hermione 
helped.” 

Page | 632 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Moody grinned. 



“Well, help him practice for this one, and I’ll be very 
surprised if he doesn’t win,” said Moody. “In the 
meantime ... constant vigilance, Potter. Constant 
vigilance.” He took another long draw from his hip 
flask, and his magical eye swiveled onto the window. 
The topmost sail of the Durmstrang ship was visible 
through it. 

“You two,” counseled Moody, his normal eye on Ron 
and Hermione, “you stick close to Potter, all right? I’m 
keeping an eye on things, but all the same ... you can 
never have too many eyes out.” 



•k k k 



Sirius sent their owl back the very next morning. It 
fluttered down beside Harry at the same moment that 
a tawny owl landed in front of Hermione, clutching a 
copy of the Daily Prophet in its beak. She took the 
newspaper, scanned the first few pages, said, “Ha! 

She hasn’t got wind of Crouch!” then joined Ron and 
Harry in reading what Sirius had to say on the 
mysterious events of the night before last. 

Harry — what do you think you are playing at, 
walking off into the forest with Viktor Krum? I want 
you to swear, by return owl, that you are not going to 
go walking with anyone else at night. There is 
somebody highly dangerous at Hogwarts. It is clear to 
me that they wanted to stop Crouch from seeing 
Dumbledore and you were probably feet away from 
them in the dark. You could have been killed. 

Your name didn’t get into the Goblet of Fire by 
accident. If someone’s trying to attack you, they’re on 

Page | 633 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




their last chance. Stay close to Ron and Hermione, do 
not leave Gryffindor Tower after hours, and arm 
yourself for the third task. Practice Stunning and 
Disarming. A few hexes wouldn’t go amiss either. 
There’s nothing you can do about Crouch. Keep your 
head down and look after yourself. I’m waiting for your 
letter giving me your word you won’t stray out-of- 
bounds again. 

Sirius 

“Who’s he, to lecture me about being out-of-bounds?” 
said Harry in mild indignation as he folded up Sirius’s 
letter and put it inside his robes. “After all the stuff he 
did at school!” 

“He’s worried about you!” said Hermione sharply. 

“Just like Moody and Hagrid! So listen to them!” 

“No one’s tried to attack me all year,” said Harry. “No 
one’s done anything to me at all — ” 

“Except put your name in the Goblet of Fire,” said 
Hermione. “And they must’ve done that for a reason, 
Harry. Snuffles is right. Maybe they’ve been biding 
their time. Maybe this is the task they’re going to get 
you.” 

“Look,” said Harry impatiently, “let’s say Sirius is 
right, and someone Stunned Krum to kidnap Crouch. 
Well, they would’ve been in the trees near us, 
wouldn’t they? But they waited till I was out of the 
way until they acted, didn’t they? So it doesn’t look 
like I’m their target, does it?” 

“They couldn’t have made it look like an accident if 
they’d murdered you in the forest!” said Hermione. 
“But if you die during a task — ” 



Page | 634 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“They didn’t care about attacking Krum, did they?” 
said Harry. “Why didn’t they just polish me off at the 
same time? They could’ve made it look like Krum and 
I had a duel or something.” 

“Harry, I don’t understand it either,” said Hermione 
desperately. “I just know there are a lot of odd things 
going on, and I don’t like it. ... Moody’s right — Sirius 
is right — you’ve got to get in training for the third 
task, straight away. And you make sure you write 
back to Sirius and promise him you’re not going to go 
sneaking off alone again.” 

The Hogwarts grounds never looked more inviting 
than when Harry had to stay indoors. For the next 
few days he spent all of his free time either in the 
library with Hermione and Ron, looking up hexes, or 
else in empty classrooms, which they sneaked into to 
practice. Harry was concentrating on the Stunning 
Spell, which he had never used before. The trouble 
was that practicing it involved certain sacrifices on 
Ron’s and Hermione ’s part. 

“Can’t we kidnap Mrs. Norris?” Ron suggested on 
Monday lunchtime as he lay flat on his back in the 
middle of their Charms classroom, having just been 
Stunned and reawoken by Harry for the fifth time in a 
row. “Let’s Stun her for a bit. Or you could use 
Dobby, Harry, I bet he’d do anything to help you. I’m 
not complaining or anything” — he got gingerly to his 
feet, rubbing his backside — “but I’m aching all over. 



“Well, you keep missing the cushions, don’t you!” said 
Hermione impatiently, rearranging the pile of 
cushions they had used for the Banishing Spell, 
which Flitwick had left in a cabinet. “Just try and fall 
backward!” 



Page | 635 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Once you’re Stunned, you can’t aim too well, 
Hermione!” said Ron angrily. “Why don’t you take a 
turn?” 

“Well, I think Harry’s got it now, anyway,” said 
Hermione hastily. “And we don’t have to worry about 
Disarming, because he’s been able to do that for ages. 
... I think we ought to start on some of these hexes 
this evening.” 

She looked down the list they had made in the 
library. 

“I like the look of this one,” she said, “this 
Impediment Curse. Should slow down anything that’s 
trying to attack you, Harry. We’ll start with that one.” 

The bell rang. They hastily shoved the cushions back 
into Flitwick’s cupboard and slipped out of the 
classroom. 

“See you at dinner!” said Hermione, and she set off for 
Arithmancy, while Harry and Ron headed toward 
North Tower, and Divination. Broad strips of dazzling 
gold sunlight fell across the corridor from the high 
windows. The sky outside was so brightly blue it 
looked as though it had been enameled. 

“It’s going to be boiling in Trelawney’s room, she never 
puts out that fire,” said Ron as they started up the 
staircase toward the silver ladder and the trapdoor. 

He was quite right. The dimly lit room was 
swelteringly hot. The fumes from the perfumed fire 
were heavier than ever. Harry’s head swam as he 
made his way over to one of the curtained windows. 
While Professor Trelawney was looking the other way, 
disentangling her shawl from a lamp, he opened it an 
inch or so and settled back in his chintz armchair, so 
Page | 636 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




that a soft breeze played across his face. It was 
extremely comfortable. 

“My dears,” said Professor Trelawney, sitting down in 
her winged armchair in front of the class and peering 
around at them all with her strangely enlarged eyes, 
“we have almost finished our work on planetary 
divination. Today, however, will be an excellent 
opportunity to examine the effects of Mars, for he is 
placed most interestingly at the present time. If you 
will all look this way, I will dim the lights. ...” 

She waved her wand and the lamps went out. The fire 
was the only source of light now. Professor Trelawney 
bent down and lifted, from under her chair, a 
miniature model of the solar system, contained within 
a glass dome. It was a beautiful thing; each of the 
moons glimmered in place around the nine planets 
and the fiery sun, all of them hanging in thin air 
beneath the glass. Harry watched lazily as Professor 
Trelawney began to point out the fascinating angle 
Mars was making to Neptune. The heavily perfumed 
fumes washed over him, and the breeze from the 
window played across his face. He could hear an 
insect humming gently somewhere behind the 
curtain. His eyelids began to droop. ... 

He was riding on the back of an eagle owl, soaring 
through the clear blue sky toward an old, ivy-covered 
house set high on a hillside. Lower and lower they 
flew, the wind blowing pleasantly in Harry’s face, until 
they reached a dark and broken window in the upper 
story of the house and entered. Now they were flying 
along a gloomy passageway, to a room at the very end 
. . . through the door they went, into a dark room 
whose windows were boarded up. ... 

Harry had left the owl’s back ... he was watching, 
now, as it fluttered across the room, into a chair with 

Page | 637 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




its back to him. ... There were two dark shapes on the 
floor beside the chair . . . both of them were stirring. . . . 

One was a huge snake . . . the other was a man ... a 
short, balding man, a man with watery eyes and a 
pointed nose ... he was wheezing and sobbing on the 
hearth rug. . . . 

“You are in luck, Wormtail,” said a cold, high-pitched 
voice from the depths of the chair in which the owl 
had landed. “You are very fortunate indeed. Your 
blunder has not ruined everything. He is dead.” 

“My Lord!” gasped the man on the floor. “My Lord, I 
am ... 1 am so pleased ... and so sorry. ...” 

“Nagini,” said the cold voice, “you are out of luck. 1 
will not be feeding Wormtail to you, after all ... but 
never mind, never mind . . . there is still Harry Potter. 



The snake hissed. Harry could see its tongue 
fluttering. 

“Now, Wormtail,” said the cold voice, “perhaps one 
more little reminder why I will not tolerate another 
blunder from you. ...” 

“My Lord ... no ... I beg you ...” 

The tip of a wand emerged from around the back of 
the chair, ft was pointing at Wormtail. 

“Crucio\” said the cold voice. 

Wormtail screamed, screamed as though every nerve 
in his body were on fire, the screaming filled Harry’s 
ears as the scar on his forehead seared with pain; he 



Page | 638 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




was yelling too. ... Voldemort would hear him, would 
know he was there. ... 



“Harry! Harry\” 

Harry opened his eyes. He was lying on the floor of 
Professor Trelawney’s room with his hands over his 
face. His scar was still burning so badly that his eyes 
were watering. The pain had been real. The whole 
class was standing around him, and Ron was 
kneeling next to him, looking terrified. 

“You all right?” he said. 

“Of course he isn’t!” said Professor Trelawney, looking 
thoroughly excited. Her great eyes loomed over Harry, 
gazing at him. “What was it, Potter? A premonition? 
An apparition? What did you see?” 

“Nothing,” Harry lied. He sat up. He could feel himself 
shaking. He couldn’t stop himself from looking 
around, into the shadows behind him; Voldemort’s 
voice had sounded so close. ... 

“You were clutching your scar!” said Professor 
Trelawney. “You were rolling on the floor, clutching 
your scar! Come now, Potter, I have experience in 
these matters!” 

Harry looked up at her. 

“I need to go to the hospital wing, I think,” he said. 
“Bad headache.” 

“My dear, you were undoubtedly stimulated by the 
extraordinary clairvoyant vibrations of my room!” said 
Professor Trelawney “If you leave now, you may lose 
the opportunity to see further than you have ever — ” 

Page | 639 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I don’t want to see anything except a headache cure,” 
said Harry. 

He stood up. The class backed away. They all looked 
unnerved. 

“See you later,” Harry muttered to Ron, and he picked 
up his bag and headed for the trapdoor, ignoring 
Professor Trelawney, who was wearing an expression 
of great frustration, as though she had just been 
denied a real treat. 

When Harry reached the bottom of her stepladder, 
however, he did not set off for the hospital wing. He 
had no intention whatsoever of going there. Sirius 
had told him what to do if his scar hurt him again, 
and Harry was going to follow his advice: He was 
going straight to Dumbledore’s office. He marched 
down the corridors, thinking about what he had seen 
in the dream ... it had been as vivid as the one that 
had awoken him on Privet Drive. ... He ran over the 
details in his mind, trying to make sure he could 
remember them. ... He had heard Voldemort accusing 
Wormtail of making a blunder ... but the owl had 
brought good news, the blunder had been repaired, 
somebody was dead ... so Wormtail was not going to 
be fed to the snake ... he, Harry, was going to be fed 
to it instead. ... 

Harry had walked right past the stone gargoyle 
guarding the entrance to Dumbledore’s office without 
noticing. He blinked, looked around, realized what he 
had done, and retraced his steps, stopping in front of 
it. Then he remembered that he didn’t know the 
password. 

“Sherbet lemon?” he tried tentatively. 

The gargoyle did not move. 

Page | 640 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Okay,” said Harry, staring at it, “Pear Drop. Er — 
Licorice Wand. Fizzing Whizbee. Drooble’s Best 
Blowing Gum. Bertie Bott’s Every Flavor Beans ... oh 
no, he doesn’t like them, does he? ... oh just open, 
can’t you?” he said angrily. “I really need to see him, 
it’s urgent!” 

The gargoyle remained immovable. 

Harry kicked it, achieving nothing but an excruciating 
pain in his big toe. 

“Chocolate Frog!” he yelled angrily, standing on one 
leg. “Sugar Quill! Cockroach Cluster!” 

The gargoyle sprang to life and jumped aside. Harry 
blinked. 

“Cockroach Cluster?” he said, amazed. “I was only 
joking. ...” 

He hurried through the gap in the walls and stepped 
onto the foot of a spiral stone staircase, which moved 
slowly upward as the doors closed behind him, taking 
him up to a polished oak door with a brass door 
knocker. 

He could hear voices from inside the office. He 
stepped off the moving staircase and hesitated, 
listening. 

“Dumbledore, I’m afraid I don’t see the connection, 
don’t see it at all!” It was the voice of the Minister of 
Magic, Cornelius Fudge. “Ludo says Bertha’s perfectly 
capable of getting herself lost. I agree we would have 
expected to have found her by now, but all the same, 
we’ve no evidence of foul play, Dumbledore, none at 
all. As for her disappearance being linked with Barty 
Crouch’s!” 

Page | 641 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“And what do you thinks happened to Barty Crouch, 
Minister?” said Moody’s growling voice. 

“I see two possibilities, Alastor,” said Fudge. “Either 
Crouch has finally cracked — more than likely, I’m 
sure you’ll agree, given his personal history — lost his 
mind, and gone wandering off somewhere — ” 

“He wandered extremely quickly, if that is the case, 
Cornelius,” said Dumbledore calmly. 

“Or else — well ...” Fudge sounded embarrassed. 

“Well, I’ll reserve judgment until after I’ve seen the 
place where he was found, but you say it was just 
past the Beauxbatons carriage? Dumbledore, you 
know what that woman is?” 

“I consider her to be a very able headmistress — and 
an excellent dancer,” said Dumbledore quietly. 

“Dumbledore, come!” said Fudge angrily. “Don’t you 
think you might be prejudiced in her favor because of 
Hagrid? They don’t all turn out harmless — if, indeed, 
you can call Hagrid harmless, with that monster 
fixation he’s got — ” 

“I no more suspect Madame Maxime than Hagrid,” 
said Dumbledore, just as calmly. “I think it possible 
that it is you who are prejudiced, Cornelius.” 

“Can we wrap up this discussion?” growled Moody. 

“Yes, yes, let’s go down to the grounds, then,” said 
Fudge impatiently. 

“No, it’s not that,” said Moody, “it’s just that Potter 
wants a word with you, Dumbledore. He’s just outside 
the door.” 



Page | 642 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE PENSIEVE 

The door of the office opened. 

“Hello, Potter,” said Moody. “Come in, then.” 

Harry walked inside. He had been inside 
Dumbledore’s office once before; it was a very 
beautiful, circular room, lined with pictures of 
previous headmasters and headmistresses of 
Hogwarts, all of whom were fast asleep, their chests 
rising and falling gently. 

Cornelius Fudge was standing beside Dumbledore’s 
desk, wearing his usual pinstriped cloak and holding 
his lime-green bowler hat. 

“Harry!” said Fudge jovially, moving forward. “How are 
you?” 

“Fine,” Harry lied. 



Page | 643 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“We were just talking about the night when Mr. 
Crouch turned up on the grounds,” said Fudge. “It 
was you who found him, was it not?” 

“Yes,” said Harry. Then, feeling it was pointless to 
pretend that he hadn’t overheard what they had been 
saying, he added, “I didn’t see Madame Maxime 
anywhere, though, and she’d have a job hiding, 
wouldn’t she?” 

Dumbledore smiled at Harry behind Fudge’s back, his 
eyes twinkling. 

“Yes, well,” said Fudge, looking embarrassed, “we’re 
about to go for a short walk on the grounds, Harry, if 
you’ll excuse us ... perhaps if you just go back to your 
class — ” 

“I wanted to talk to you, Professor,” Harry said 
quickly, looking at Dumbledore, who gave him a swift, 
searching look. 

“Wait here for me, Harry,” he said. “Our examination 
of the grounds will not take long.” 

They trooped out in silence past him and closed the 
door. After a minute or so, Harry heard the clunks of 
Moody’s wooden leg growing fainter in the corridor 
below. He looked around. 

“Hello, Fawkes,” he said. 

Fawkes, Professor Dumbledore’s phoenix, was 
standing on his golden perch beside the door. The 
size of a swan, with magnificent scarlet-and-gold 
plumage, he swished his long tail and blinked 
benignly at Harry. 



Page | 644 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry sat down in a chair in front of Dumbledore’s 
desk. For several minutes, he sat and watched the old 
headmasters and headmistresses snoozing in their 
frames, thinking about what he had just heard, and 
running his fingers over his scar. It had stopped 
hurting now. 

He felt much calmer, somehow, now that he was in 
Dumbledore’s office, knowing he would shortly be 
telling him about the dream. Harry looked up at the 
walls behind the desk. The patched and ragged 
Sorting Hat was standing on a shelf. A glass case next 
to it held a magnificent silver sword with large rubies 
set into the hilt, which Harry recognized as the one he 
himself had pulled out of the Sorting Hat in his 
second year. The sword had once belonged to Godric 
Gryffindor, founder of Harry’s House. He was gazing 
at it, remembering how it had come to his aid when 
he had thought all hope was lost, when he noticed a 
patch of silvery light, dancing and shimmering on the 
glass case. He looked around for the source of the 
light and saw a sliver of silver-white shining brightly 
from within a black cabinet behind him, whose door 
had not been closed properly. Harry hesitated, 
glanced at Fawkes, then got up, walked across the 
office, and pulled open the cabinet door. 

A shallow stone basin lay there, with odd carvings 
around the edge: runes and symbols that Harry did 
not recognize. The silvery light was coming from the 
basin’s contents, which were like nothing Harry had 
ever seen before. He could not tell whether the 
substance was liquid or gas. It was a bright, whitish 
silver, and it was moving ceaselessly; the surface of it 
became ruffled like water beneath wind, and then, 
like clouds, separated and swirled smoothly. It looked 
like light made liquid — or like wind made solid — 
Harry couldn’t make up his mind. 



Page | 645 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He wanted to touch it, to find out what it felt like, but 
nearly four years’ experience of the magical world told 
him that sticking his hand into a bowl full of some 
unknown substance was a very stupid thing to do. He 
therefore pulled his wand out of the inside of his 
robes, cast a nervous look around the office, looked 
back at the contents of the basin, and prodded them. 

The surface of the silvery stuff inside the basin began 
to swirl very fast. 

Harry bent closer, his head right inside the cabinet. 
The silvery substance had become transparent; it 
looked like glass. He looked down into it, expecting to 
see the stone bottom of the basin — and saw instead 
an enormous room below the surface of the 
mysterious substance, a room into which he seemed 
to be looking through a circular window in the ceiling. 

The room was dimly lit; he thought it might even be 
underground, for there were no windows, merely 
torches in brackets such as the ones that illuminated 
the walls of Hogwarts. Lowering his face so that his 
nose was a mere inch away from the glassy 
substance, Harry saw that rows and rows of witches 
and wizards were seated around every wall on what 
seemed to be benches rising in levels. An empty chair 
stood in the very center of the room. There was 
something about the chair that gave Harry an 
ominous feeling. Chains encircled the arms of it, as 
though its occupants were usually tied to it. 

Where was this place? It surely wasn’t Hogwarts; he 
had never seen a room like that here in the castle. 
Moreover, the crowd in the mysterious room at the 
bottom of the basin was comprised of adults, and 
Harry knew there were not nearly that many teachers 
at Hogwarts. They seemed, he thought, to be waiting 
for something; even though he could only see the tops 
Page | 646 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




of their hats, all of their faces seemed to be pointing 
in one direction, and none of them were talking to one 
another. 

The basin being circular, and the room he was 
observing square, Harry could not make out what was 
going on in the corners of it. He leaned even closer, 
tilting his head, trying to see . . . 

The tip of his nose touched the strange substance 
into which he was staring. 

Dumbledore’s office gave an almighty lurch — Harry 
was thrown forward and pitched headfirst into the 
substance inside the basin — 

But his head did not hit the stone bottom. He was 
falling through something icy-cold and black; it was 
like being sucked into a dark whirlpool — 

And suddenly, Harry found himself sitting on a bench 
at the end of the room inside the basin, a bench 
raised high above the others. He looked up at the 
high stone ceiling, expecting to see the circular 
window through which he had just been staring, but 
there was nothing there but dark, solid stone. 

Breathing hard and fast, Harry looked around him. 
Not one of the witches and wizards in the room (and 
there were at least two hundred of them) was looking 
at him. Not one of them seemed to have noticed that a 
fourteen-year- old boy had just dropped from the 
ceiling into their midst. Harry turned to the wizard 
next to him on the bench and uttered a loud cry of 
surprise that reverberated around the silent room. 

He was sitting right next to Albus Dumbledore. 



Page | 647 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Professor!” Harry said in a kind of strangled whisper. 
“I’m sorry — I didn’t mean to — I was just looking at 
that basin in your cabinet — I — where are we?” 

But Dumbledore didn’t move or speak. He ignored 
Harry completely. Like every other wizard on the 
benches, he was staring into the far corner of the 
room, where there was a door. 

Harry gazed, nonplussed, at Dumbledore, then 
around at the silently watchful crowd, then back at 
Dumbledore. And then it dawned on him. ... 

Once before, Harry had found himself somewhere that 
nobody could see or hear him. That time, he had 
fallen through a page in an enchanted diary, right 
into somebody else’s memory ... and unless he was 
very much mistaken, something of the sort had 
happened again. ... 

Harry raised his right hand, hesitated, and then 
waved it energetically in front of Dumbledore ’s face. 
Dumbledore did not blink, look around at Harry, or 
indeed move at all. And that, in Harry’s opinion, 
settled the matter. Dumbledore wouldn’t ignore him 
like that. He was inside a memory, and this was not 
the present-day Dumbledore. Yet it couldn’t be that 
long ago . . . the Dumbledore sitting next to him now 
was silver-haired, just like the present-day 
Dumbledore. But what was this place? What were all 
these wizards waiting for? 

Harry looked around more carefully. The room, as he 
had suspected when observing it from above, was 
almost certainly underground — more of a dungeon 
than a room, he thought. There was a bleak and 
forbidding air about the place; there were no pictures 
on the walls, no decorations at all; just these serried 
rows of benches, rising in levels all around the room, 
Page | 648 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




all positioned so that they had a clear view of that 
chair with the chains on its arms. 

Before Harry could reach any conclusions about the 
place in which they were, he heard footsteps. The 
door in the corner of the dungeon opened and three 
people entered — or at least one man, flanked by two 
dementors. 

Harry’s insides went cold. The dementors — tall, 
hooded creatures whose faces were concealed — were 
gliding slowly toward the chair in the center of the 
room, each grasping one of the man’s arms with their 
dead and rotten-looking hands. The man between 
them looked as though he was about to faint, and 
Harry couldn’t blame him ... he knew the dementors 
could not touch him inside a memory, but he 
remembered their power only too well. The watching 
crowd recoiled slightly as the dementors placed the 
man in the chained chair and glided back out of the 
room. The door swung shut behind them. 

Harry looked down at the man now sitting in the 
chair and saw that it was Karkaroff. 

Unlike Dumbledore, Karkaroff looked much younger; 
his hair and goatee were black. He was not dressed in 
sleek furs, but in thin and ragged robes. He was 
shaking. Even as Harry watched, the chains on the 
arms of the chair glowed suddenly gold and snaked 
their way up Karkaroff’s arms, binding him there. 

“Igor Karkaroff,” said a curt voice to Harry’s left. 

Harry looked around and saw Mr. Crouch standing 
up in the middle of the bench beside him. Crouch’s 
hair was dark, his face was much less lined, he 
looked fit and alert. “You have been brought from 
Azkaban to present evidence to the Ministry of Magic. 



Page | 649 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




You have given us to understand that you have 
important information for us.” 

Karkaroff straightened himself as best he could, 
tightly bound to the chair. 

“I have, sir,” he said, and although his voice was very 
scared, Harry could still hear the familiar unctuous 
note in it. “I wish to be of use to the Ministry. I wish 
to help. I — I know that the Ministry is trying to — to 
round up the last of the Dark Lord’s supporters. I am 
eager to assist in any way I can. ...” 

There was a murmur around the benches. Some of 
the wizards and witches were surveying Karkaroff 
with interest, others with pronounced mistrust. Then 
Harry heard, quite distinctly, from Dumbledore’s 
other side, a familiar, growling voice saying, “Filth.” 

Harry leaned forward so that he could see past 
Dumbledore. Mad-Eye Moody was sitting there — 
except that there was a very noticeable difference in 
his appearance. He did not have his magical eye, but 
two normal ones. Both were looking down upon 
Karkaroff, and both were narrowed in intense dislike. 

“Crouch is going to let him out,” Moody breathed 
quietly to Dumbledore. “He’s done a deal with him. 
Took me six months to track him down, and Crouch 
is going to let him go if he’s got enough new names. 
Let’s hear his information, I say, and throw him 
straight back to the dementors.” 

Dumbledore made a small noise of dissent through 
his long, crooked nose. 

“Ah, I was forgetting ... you don’t like the dementors, 
do you, Albus?” said Moody with a sardonic smile. 



Page | 650 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“No,” said Dumbledore calmly, “I’m afraid I don’t. I 
have long felt the Ministry is wrong to ally itself with 
such creatures.” 

“But for filth like this ...” Moody said softly. 

“You say you have names for us, Karkaroff,” said Mr. 
Crouch. “Let us hear them, please.” 

“You must understand,” said Karkaroff hurriedly, 

“that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named operated always in 
the greatest secrecy. . . . He preferred that we — I 
mean to say, his supporters — and I regret now, very 
deeply, that I ever counted myself among them — ” 

“Get on with it,” sneered Moody. 

“ — we never knew the names of every one of our 
fellows — He alone knew exactly who we all were — ” 

“Which was a wise move, wasn’t it, as it prevented 
someone like you, Karkaroff, from turning all of them 
in,” muttered Moody. 

“Yet you say you have some names for us?” said Mr. 
Crouch. 

“I — I do,” said Karkaroff breathlessly. “And these 
were important supporters, mark you. People I saw 
with my own eyes doing his bidding. I give this 
information as a sign that I fully and totally renounce 
him, and am filled with a remorse so deep I can 
barely — ” 

“These names are?” said Mr. Crouch sharply. 
Karkaroff drew a deep breath. 



Page | 651 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“There was Antonin Dolohov,” he said. “I — I saw him 
torture countless Muggles and — and non-supporters 
of the Dark Lord.” 



“And helped him do it,” murmured Moody. 

“We have already apprehended Dolohov,” said 
Crouch. “He was caught shortly after yourself.” 

“Indeed?” said Karkaroff, his eyes widening. “I — I am 
delighted to hear it!” 

But he didn’t look it. Harry could tell that this news 
had come as a real blow to him. One of his names 
was worthless. 

“Any others?” said Crouch coldly. 

“Why, yes ... there was Rosier,” said Karkaroff 
hurriedly. “Evan Rosier.” 

“Rosier is dead,” said Crouch. “He was caught shortly 
after you were too. He preferred to fight rather than 
come quietly and was killed in the struggle.” 

“Took a bit of me with him, though,” whispered 
Moody to Harry’s right. Harry looked around at him 
once more, and saw him indicating the large chunk 
out of his nose to Dumbledore. 

“No — no more than Rosier deserved!” said Karkaroff, 
a real note of panic in his voice now. Harry could see 
that he was starting to worry that none of his 
information would be of any use to the Ministry. 
Karkaroff’s eyes darted toward the door in the corner, 
behind which the dementors undoubtedly still stood, 
waiting. 

“Any more?” said Crouch. 

Page | 652 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes!” said Karkaroff. “There was Travers — he helped 
murder the McKinnons! Mulciber — he specialized in 
the Imperius Curse, forced countless people to do 
horrific things! Rookwood, who was a spy, and passed 
He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named useful information from 
inside the Ministry itself!” 

Harry could tell that, this time, Karkaroff had struck 
gold. The watching crowd was all murmuring 
together. 

“Rookwood?” said Mr. Crouch, nodding to a witch 
sitting in front of him, who began scribbling upon her 
piece of parchment. “Augustus Rookwood of the 
Department of Mysteries?” 

“The very same,” said Karkaroff eagerly. “I believe he 
used a network of well-placed wizards, both inside the 
Ministry and out, to collect information — ” 

“But Travers and Mulciber we have,” said Mr. Crouch. 
“Very well, Karkaroff, if that is all, you will be 
returned to Azkaban while we decide — ” 

“Not yet!” cried Karkaroff, looking quite desperate. 
“Wait, I have more!” 

Harry could see him sweating in the torchlight, his 
white skin contrasting strongly with the black of his 
hair and beard. 

“Snape!” he shouted. “Severus Snape!” 

“Snape has been cleared by this council,” said Crouch 
disdainfully. “He has been vouched for by Albus 
Dumbledore.” 



Page | 653 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“No!” shouted Karkaroff, straining at the chains that 
bound him to the chair. “I assure you! Severus Snape 
is a Death Eater!” 

Dumbledore had gotten to his feet. 

“I have given evidence already on this matter,” he said 
calmly. “Severus Snape was indeed a Death Eater. 
However, he rejoined our side before Lord Voldemort’s 
downfall and turned spy for us, at great personal risk. 
He is now no more a Death Eater than I am.” 

Harry turned to look at Mad-Eye Moody. He was 
wearing a look of deep skepticism behind 
Dumbledore ’s back. 

“Very well, Karkaroff,” Crouch said coldly, “you have 
been of assistance. I shall review your case. You will 
return to Azkaban in the meantime. ...” 

Mr. Crouch’s voice faded. Harry looked around; the 
dungeon was dissolving as though it were made of 
smoke; everything was fading; he could see only his 
own body — all else was swirling darkness. ... 

And then, the dungeon returned. Harry was sitting in 
a different seat, still on the highest bench, but now to 
the left side of Mr. Crouch. The atmosphere seemed 
quite different: relaxed, even cheerful. The witches 
and wizards all around the walls were talking to one 
another, almost as though they were at some sort of 
sporting event. Harry noticed a witch halfway up the 
rows of benches opposite. She had short blonde hair, 
was wearing magenta robes, and was sucking the end 
of an acid-green quill. It was, unmistakably, a 
younger Rita Skeeter. Harry looked around; 
Dumbledore was sitting beside him again, wearing 
different robes. Mr. Crouch looked more tired and 



Page | 654 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




somehow fiercer, gaunter. ... Harry understood. It was 
a different memory, a different day ... a different trial. 

The door in the corner opened, and Ludo Bagman 
walked into the room. 

This was not, however, a Ludo Bagman gone to seed, 
but a Ludo Bagman who was clearly at the height of 
his Quidditch-playing fitness. His nose wasn’t broken 
now; he was tall and lean and muscular. Bagman 
looked nervous as he sat down in the chained chair, 
but it did not bind him there as it had bound 
Karkaroff, and Bagman, perhaps taking heart from 
this, glanced around at the watching crowd, waved at 
a couple of them, and managed a small smile. 

“Ludo Bagman, you have been brought here in front 
of the Council of Magical Law to answer charges 
relating to the activities of the Death Eaters,” said Mr. 
Crouch. “We have heard the evidence against you, 
and are about to reach our verdict. Do you have 
anything to add to your testimony before we 
pronounce judgment?” 

Harry couldn’t believe his ears. Ludo Bagman, a 
Death Eater? 

“Only,” said Bagman, smiling awkwardly, “well — I 
know I’ve been a bit of an idiot — ” 

One or two wizards and witches in the surrounding 
seats smiled indulgently. Mr. Crouch did not appear 
to share their feelings. He was staring down at Ludo 
Bagman with an expression of the utmost severity 
and dislike. 

“You never spoke a truer word, boy,” someone 
muttered dryly to Dumbledore behind Harry. He 
looked around and saw Moody sitting there again. “If I 

Page | 655 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




didn’t know he’d always been dim, I’d have said some 
of those Bludgers had permanently affected his brain. 



“Ludovic Bagman, you were caught passing 
information to Lord Voldemort’s supporters,” said Mr. 
Crouch. “For this, I suggest a term of imprisonment 
in Azkaban lasting no less than — ” 

But there was an angry outcry from the surrounding 
benches. Several of the witches and wizards around 
the walls stood up, shaking their heads, and even 
their fists, at Mr. Crouch. 

“But I’ve told you, I had no idea!” Bagman called 
earnestly over the crowd’s babble, his round blue eyes 
widening. “None at all! Old Rookwood was a friend of 
my dad’s ... never crossed my mind he was in with 
You-Know-Who! I thought I was collecting information 
for our side! And Rookwood kept talking about getting 
me a job in the Ministry later on ... once my 
Quidditch days are over, you know ... I mean, I can’t 
keep getting hit by Bludgers for the rest of my life, 
can I?” 

There were titters from the crowd. 

“It will be put to the vote,” said Mr. Crouch coldly. He 
turned to the right-hand side of the dungeon. “The 
jury will please raise their hands ... those in favor of 
imprisonment ...” 

Harry looked toward the right-hand side of the 
dungeon. Not one person raised their hand. Many of 
the witches and wizards around the walls began to 
clap. One of the witches on the jury stood up. 

“Yes?” barked Crouch. 



Page | 656 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“We’d just like to congratulate Mr. Bagman on his 
splendid performance for England in the Quidditch 
match against Turkey last Saturday,” the witch said 
breathlessly. 

Mr. Crouch looked furious. The dungeon was ringing 
with applause now. Bagman got to his feet and 
bowed, beaming. 

“Despicable,” Mr. Crouch spat at Dumbledore, sitting 
down as Bagman walked out of the dungeon. 
“Rookwood get him a job indeed. ... The day Ludo 
Bagman joins us will be a sad day indeed for the 
Ministry. ...” 

And the dungeon dissolved again. When it had 
returned, Harry looked around. He and Dumbledore 
were still sitting beside Mr. Crouch, but the 
atmosphere could not have been more different. There 
was total silence, broken only by the dry sobs of a 
frail, wispy-looking witch in the seat next to Mr. 
Crouch. She was clutching a handkerchief to her 
mouth with trembling hands. Harry looked up at 
Crouch and saw that he looked gaunter and grayer 
than ever before. A nerve was twitching in his temple. 

“Bring them in,” he said, and his voice echoed 
through the silent dungeon. 

The door in the corner opened yet again. Six 
dementors entered this time, flanking a group of four 
people. Harry saw the people in the crowd turn to 
look up at Mr. Crouch. A few of them whispered to 
one another. 

The dementors placed each of the four people in the 
four chairs with chained arms that now stood on the 
dungeon floor. There was a thickset man who stared 
blankly up at Crouch; a thinner and more nervous- 

Page | 657 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




looking man, whose eyes were darting around the 
crowd; a woman with thick, shining dark hair and 
heavily hooded eyes, who was sitting in the chained 
chair as though it were a throne; and a boy in his late 
teens, who looked nothing short of petrified. He was 
shivering, his straw-colored hair all over his face, his 
freckled skin milk-white. The wispy little witch beside 
Crouch began to rock backward and forward in her 
seat, whimpering into her handkerchief. 

Crouch stood up. He looked down upon the four in 
front of him, and there was pure hatred in his face. 

“You have been brought here before the Council of 
Magical Law,” he said clearly, “so that we may pass 
judgment on you, for a crime so heinous — ” 

“Father,” said the boy with the straw-colored hair. 
“Father ... please ...” 

“ — that we have rarely heard the like of it within this 
court,” said Crouch, speaking more loudly, drowning 
out his son’s voice. “We have heard the evidence 
against you. The four of you stand accused of 
capturing an Auror — Frank Longbottom — and 
subjecting him to the Cruciatus Curse, believing him 
to have knowledge of the present whereabouts of your 
exiled master, He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named — ” 

“Father, I didn’t!” shrieked the boy in chains below. “I 
didn’t, I swear it, Father, don’t send me back to the 
dementors — ” 

“You are further accused,” bellowed Mr. Crouch, “of 
using the Cruciatus Curse on Frank Longbottom’s 
wife, when he would not give you information. You 
planned to restore He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named to 
power, and to resume the lives of violence you 



Page | 658 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




presumably led while he was strong. I now ask the 
jury — ” 

“Mother!” screamed the boy below, and the wispy little 
witch beside Crouch began to sob, rocking backward 
and forward. “Mother, stop him, Mother, I didn’t do it, 
it wasn’t me!” 

“I now ask the jury,” shouted Mr. Crouch, “to raise 
their hands if they believe, as I do, that these crimes 
deserve a life sentence in Azkaban!” 

In unison, the witches and wizards along the right- 
hand side of the dungeon raised their hands. The 
crowd around the walls began to clap as it had for 
Bagman, their faces full of savage triumph. The boy 
began to scream. 

“No! Mother, no! I didn’t do it, I didn’t do it, I didn’t 
know! Don’t send me there, don’t let him!” 

The dementors were gliding back into the room. The 
boys’ three companions rose quietly from their seats; 
the woman with the heavy-lidded eyes looked up at 
Crouch and called, “The Dark Lord will rise again, 
Crouch! Throw us into Azkaban; we will wait! He will 
rise again and will come for us, he will reward us 
beyond any of his other supporters! We alone were 
faithful! We alone tried to find him!” 

But the boy was trying to fight off the dementors, 
even though Harry could see their cold, draining 
power starting to affect him. The crowd was jeering, 
some of them on their feet, as the woman swept out of 
the dungeon, and the boy continued to struggle. 

“I’m your son!” he screamed up at Crouch. “I’m your 
son!” 



Page | 659 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You are no son of mine!” bellowed Mr. Crouch, his 
eyes bulging suddenly. “I have no son!” 

The wispy witch beside him gave a great gasp and 
slumped in her seat. She had fainted. Crouch 
appeared not to have noticed. 

“Take them away!” Crouch roared at the dementors, 
spit flying from his mouth. “Take them away, and 
may they rot there!” 

“Father! Father, I wasn’t involved! No! No! Father, 
please!” 

“I think, Harry, it is time to return to my office,” said 
a quiet voice in Harry’s ear. 

Harry started. He looked around. Then he looked on 
his other side. 

There was an Albus Dumbledore sitting on his right, 
watching Crouch’s son being dragged away by the 
dementors — and there was an Albus Dumbledore on 
his left, looking right at him. 

“Come,” said the Dumbledore on his left, and he put 
his hand under Harry’s elbow. Harry felt himself 
rising into the air; the dungeon dissolved around him; 
for a moment, all was blackness, and then he felt as 
though he had done a slow-motion somersault, 
suddenly landing flat on his feet, in what seemed like 
the dazzling light of Dumbledore ’s sunlit office. The 
stone basin was shimmering in the cabinet in front of 
him, and Albus Dumbledore was standing beside 
him. 

“Professor,” Harry gasped, “I know I shouldn’t’ve — I 
didn’t mean — the cabinet door was sort of open and 



Page | 660 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I quite understand,” said Dumbledore. He lifted the 
basin, carried it over to his desk, placed it upon the 
polished top, and sat down in the chair behind it. He 
motioned for Harry to sit down opposite him. 

Harry did so, staring at the stone basin. The contents 
had returned to their original, silvery-white state, 
swirling and rippling beneath his gaze. 

“What is it?” Harry asked shakily. 

“This? It is called a Pensieve,” said Dumbledore. “I 
sometimes find, and I am sure you know the feeling, 
that I simply have too many thoughts and memories 
crammed into my mind.” 

“Er,” said Harry, who couldn’t truthfully say that he 
had ever felt anything of the sort. 

“At these times,” said Dumbledore, indicating the 
stone basin, “I use the Pensieve. One simply siphons 
the excess thoughts from one’s mind, pours them into 
the basin, and examines them at one’s leisure. It 
becomes easier to spot patterns and links, you 
understand, when they are in this form.” 

“You mean . . . that stuff’s your thoughts?” Harry said, 
staring at the swirling white substance in the basin. 

“Certainly,” said Dumbledore. “Let me show you.” 

Dumbledore drew his wand out of the inside of his 
robes and placed the tip into his own silvery hair, 
near his temple. When he took the wand away, hair 
seemed to be clinging to it — but then Harry saw that 
it was in fact a glistening strand of the same strange 
silvery-white substance that filled the Pensieve. 
Dumbledore added this fresh thought to the basin, 
and Harry, astonished, saw his own face swimming 
Page | 661 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




around the surface of the bowl. Dumbledore placed 
his long hands on either side of the Pensieve and 
swirled it, rather as a gold prospector would pan for 
fragments of gold . . . and Harry saw his own face 
change smoothly into Snape’s, who opened his mouth 
and spoke to the ceiling, his voice echoing slightly. 

“It’s coming back ... Karkaroff’s too ... stronger and 
clearer than ever ...” 

“A connection I could have made without assistance,” 
Dumbledore sighed, “but never mind.” He peered over 
the top of his half-moon spectacles at Harry, who was 
gaping at Snape’s face, which was continuing to swirl 
around the bowl. “I was using the Pensieve when Mr. 
Fudge arrived for our meeting and put it away rather 
hastily. Undoubtedly I did not fasten the cabinet door 
properly. Naturally, it would have attracted your 
attention.” 

“I’m sorry,” Harry mumbled. 

Dumbledore shook his head. “Curiosity is not a sin,” 
he said. “But we should exercise caution with our 
curiosity ... yes, indeed ...” 

Frowning slightly, he prodded the thoughts within the 
basin with the tip of his wand. Instantly, a figure rose 
out of it, a plump, scowling girl of about sixteen, who 
began to revolve slowly, with her feet still in the basin. 
She took no notice whatsoever of Harry or Professor 
Dumbledore. When she spoke, her voice echoed as 
Snape’s had done, as though it were coming from the 
depths of the stone basin. “He put a hex on me, 
Professor Dumbledore, and I was only teasing him, 
sir. I only said I’d seen him kissing Florence behind 
the greenhouses last Thursday. ...” 



Page | 662 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“But why, Bertha,” said Dumbledore sadly, looking up 
at the now silently revolving girl, “why did you have to 
follow him in the first place?” 

“Bertha?” Harry whispered, looking up at her. “Is that 
— was that Bertha Jorkins?” 

“Yes,” said Dumbledore, prodding the thoughts in the 
basin again; Bertha sank back into them, and they 
became silvery and opaque once more. “That was 
Bertha as I remember her at school.” 

The silvery light from the Pensieve illuminated 
Dumbledore’s face, and it struck Harry suddenly how 
very old he was looking. He knew, of course, that 
Dumbledore was getting on in years, but somehow he 
never really thought of Dumbledore as an old man. 

“So, Harry,” said Dumbledore quietly. “Before you got 
lost in my thoughts, you wanted to tell me 
something.” 

“Yes,” said Harry. “Professor — I was in Divination 
just now, and — er — I fell asleep.” 

He hesitated here, wondering if a reprimand was 
coming, but Dumbledore merely said, “Quite 
understandable. Continue.” 

“Well, I had a dream,” said Harry. “A dream about 
Lord Voldemort. He was torturing Wormtail ... you 
know who Wormtail — ” 

“I do know,” said Dumbledore promptly. “Please 
continue.” 

“Voldemort got a letter from an owl. He said 
something like, Wormtail’s blunder had been 
repaired. He said someone was dead. Then he said, 

Page | 663 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Wormtail wouldn’t be fed to the snake — there was a 
snake beside his chair. He said — he said he’d be 
feeding me to it, instead. Then he did the Cruciatus 
Curse on Wormtail — and my scar hurt,” Harry said. 
“It woke me up, it hurt so badly.” 

Dumbledore merely looked at him. 

“Er — that’s all,” said Harry. 

“I see,” said Dumbledore quietly. “I see. Now, has your 
scar hurt at any other time this year, excepting the 
time it woke you up over the summer?” 

“No, I — how did you know it woke me up over the 
summer?” said Harry, astonished. 

“You are not Sirius’s only correspondent,” said 
Dumbledore. “I have also been in contact with him 
ever since he left Hogwarts last year. It was I who 
suggested the mountainside cave as the safest place 
for him to stay.” 

Dumbledore got up and began walking up and down 
behind his desk. Every now and then, he placed his 
wand tip to his temple, removed another shining 
silver thought, and added it to the Pensieve. The 
thoughts inside began to swirl so fast that Harry 
couldn’t make out anything clearly: It was merely a 
blur of color. 

“Professor?” he said quietly, after a couple of minutes. 

Dumbledore stopped pacing and looked at Harry. 

“My apologies,” he said quietly. He sat back down at 
his desk. 

“D’you — d’you know why my scar’s hurting me?” 

Page | 664 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore looked very intently at Harry for a 
moment, and then said, “I have a theory, no more 
than that. ... It is my belief that your scar hurts both 
when Lord Voldemort is near you, and when he is 
feeling a particularly strong surge of hatred.” 

“But ... why?” 

“Because you and he are connected by the curse that 
failed,” said Dumbledore. “That is no ordinary scar.” 

“So you think . . . that dream . . . did it really happen?” 

“It is possible,” said Dumbledore. “I would say — 
probable. Harry — did you see Voldemort?” 

“No,” said Harry. “Just the back of his chair. But — 
there wouldn’t have been anything to see, would 
there? I mean, he hasn’t got a body, has he? But ... 
but then how could he have held the wand?” Harry 
said slowly. 

“How indeed?” muttered Dumbledore. “How indeed 



Neither Dumbledore nor Harry spoke for a while. 
Dumbledore was gazing across the room, and, every 
now and then, placing his wand tip to his temple and 
adding another shining silver thought to the seething 
mass within the Pensieve. 

“Professor,” Harry said at last, “do you think he’s 
getting stronger?” 

“Voldemort?” said Dumbledore, looking at Harry over 
the Pensieve. It was the characteristic, piercing look 
Dumbledore had given him on other occasions, and 
always made Harry feel as though Dumbledore were 
seeing right through him in a way that even Moody’s 
Page | 665 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




magical eye could not. “Once again, Harry, I can only 
give you my suspicions.” 

Dumbledore sighed again, and he looked older, and 
wearier, than ever. 

“The years of Voldemort’s ascent to power,” he said, 
“were marked with disappearances. Bertha Jorkins 
has vanished without a trace in the place where 
Voldemort was certainly known to be last. Mr. Crouch 
too has disappeared ... within these very grounds. 

And there was a third disappearance, one which the 
Ministry, I regret to say, do not consider of any 
importance, for it concerns a Muggle. His name was 
Frank Bryce, he lived in the village where Voldemort’s 
father grew up, and he has not been seen since last 
August. You see, I read the Muggle newspapers, 
unlike most of my Ministry friends.” 

Dumbledore looked very seriously at Harry. 

“These disappearances seem to me to be linked. The 
Ministry disagrees — as you may have heard, while 
waiting outside my office.” 

Harry nodded. Silence fell between them again, 
Dumbledore extracting thoughts every now and then. 
Harry felt as though he ought to go, but his curiosity 
held him in his chair. 

“Professor?” he said again. 

“Yes, Harry?” said Dumbledore. 

“Er . . . could I ask you about . . . that court thing I was 
in ... in the Pensieve?” 



Page | 666 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You could,” said Dumbledore heavily. “I attended it 
many times, but some trials come back to me more 
clearly than others ... particularly now. ...” 

“You know — you know the trial you found me in? 

The one with Crouch’s son? Well ... were they talking 
about Neville’s parents?” 

Dumbledore gave Harry a very sharp look. “Has 
Neville never told you why he has been brought up by 
his grandmother?” he said. 

Harry shook his head, wondering, as he did so, how 
he could have failed to ask Neville this, in almost four 
years of knowing him. 

“Yes, they were talking about Neville’s parents,” said 
Dumbledore. “His father, Frank, was an Auror just 
like Professor Moody. He and his wife were tortured 
for information about Voldemort’s whereabouts after 
he lost his powers, as you heard.” 

“So they’re dead?” said Harry quietly. 

“No,” said Dumbledore, his voice full of a bitterness 
Harry had never heard there before. “They are insane. 
They are both in St. Mungo’s Hospital for Magical 
Maladies and Injuries. I believe Neville visits them, 
with his grandmother, during the holidays. They do 
not recognize him.” 

Harry sat there, horror-struck. He had never known 
... never, in four years, bothered to find out ... 

“The Longbottoms were very popular,” said 
Dumbledore. “The attacks on them came after 
Voldemort’s fall from power, just when everyone 
thought they were safe. Those attacks caused a wave 
of fury such as I have never known. The Ministry was 
Page | 667 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




under great pressure to catch those who had done it. 
Unfortunately, the Longbottoms’ evidence was — 
given their condition — none too reliable.” 

“Then Mr. Crouch’s son might not have been 
involved?” said Harry slowly. 

Dumbledore shook his head. 

“As to that, I have no idea.” 

Harry sat in silence once more, watching the contents 
of the Pensieve swirl. There were two more questions 
he was burning to ask . . . but they concerned the guilt 
of living people. ... 

“Er,” he said, “Mr. Bagman ...” 

"... has never been accused of any Dark activity 
since,” said Dumbledore calmly. 

“Right,” said Harry hastily, staring at the contents of 
the Pensieve again, which were swirling more slowly 
now that Dumbledore had stopped adding thoughts. 
“And ... er ...” 

But the Pensieve seemed to be asking his question for 
him. Snape’s face was swimming on the surface 
again. Dumbledore glanced down into it, and then up 
at Harry. 

“No more has Professor Snape,” he said. 

Harry looked into Dumbledore ’s light blue eyes, and 
the thing he really wanted to know spilled out of his 
mouth before he could stop it. 

“What made you think he’d really stopped supporting 
Voldemort, Professor?” 

Page | 668 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore held Harry’s gaze for a few seconds, and 
then said, “That, Harry, is a matter between Professor 
Snape and myself.” 

Harry knew that the interview was over; Dumbledore 
did not look angry, yet there was a finality in his tone 
that told Harry it was time to go. He stood up, and so 
did Dumbledore. 

“Harry,” he said as Harry reached the door. “Please do 
not speak about Neville’s parents to anybody else. He 
has the right to let people know, when he is ready.” 

“Yes, Professor,” said Harry, turning to go. 

“And — ” 

Harry looked back. Dumbledore was standing over 
the Pensieve, his face lit from beneath by its silvery 
spots of light, looking older than ever. He stared at 
Harry for a moment, and then said, “Good luck with 
the third task.” 



Page | 669 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE THIRD TASK 

“Dumbledore reckons You- Know- Who’s getting 
stronger again as well?” Ron whispered. 

Everything Harry had seen in the Pensieve, nearly 
everything Dumbledore had told and shown him 
afterward, he had now shared with Ron and 
Hermione — and, of course, with Sirius, to whom 
Harry had sent an owl the moment he had left 
Dumbledore’s office. Harry, Ron, and Hermione sat 
up late in the common room once again that night, 
talking it all over until Harry’s mind was reeling, until 
he understood what Dumbledore had meant about a 
head becoming so full of thoughts that it would have 
been a relief to siphon them off. 

Ron stared into the common room fire. Harry thought 
he saw Ron shiver slightly, even though the evening 
was warm. 

“And he trusts Snape?” Ron said. “He really trusts 
Snape, even though he knows he was a Death Eater?” 



Page | 670 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“Yes,” said Harry. 



Hermione had not spoken for ten minutes. She was 
sitting with her forehead in her hands, staring at her 
knees. Harry thought she too looked as though she 
could have done with a Pensieve. 

“Rita Skeeter,” she muttered finally. 

“How can you be worrying about her now?” said Ron, 
in utter disbelief. 

“I’m not worrying about her,” Hermione said to her 
knees. “I’m just thinking ... remember what she said 
to me in the Three Broomsticks? ‘I know things about 
Ludo Bagman that would make your hair curl.’ This 
is what she meant, isn’t it? She reported his trial, she 
knew he’d passed information to the Death Eaters. 
And Winky too, remember ... ‘Ludo Bagman’s a bad 
wizard.’ Mr. Crouch would have been furious he got 
off, he would have talked about it at home.” 

“Yeah, but Bagman didn’t pass information on 
purpose, did he?” 

Hermione shrugged. 

“And Fudge reckons Madame Maxime attacked 
Crouch?” Ron said, turning back to Harry. 

“Yeah,” said Harry, “but he’s only saying that because 
Crouch disappeared near the Beauxbatons carriage.” 

“We never thought of her, did we?” said Ron slowly. 
“Mind you, she’s definitely got giant blood, and she 
doesn’t want to admit it — ” 

“Of course she doesn’t,” said Hermione sharply, 
looking up. “Look what happened to Hagrid when Rita 

Page | 671 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




found out about his mother. Look at Fudge, jumping 
to conclusions about her, just because she’s part 
giant. Who needs that sort of prejudice? I’d probably 
say I had big bones if I knew that’s what I’d get for 
telling the truth.” 

Hermione looked at her watch. “We haven’t done any 
practicing!” she said, looking shocked. “We were going 
to do the Impediment Curse! We’ll have to really get 
down to it tomorrow! Come on, Harry, you need to get 
some sleep.” 

Harry and Ron went slowly upstairs to their 
dormitory. As Harry pulled on his pajamas, he looked 
over at Neville’s bed. True to his word to Dumbledore, 
he had not told Ron and Hermione about Neville’s 
parents. As Harry took off his glasses and climbed 
into his four-poster, he imagined how it must feel to 
have parents still living but unable to recognize you. 
He often got sympathy from strangers for being an 
orphan, but as he listened to Neville’s snores, he 
thought that Neville deserved it more than he did. 
Lying in the darkness, Harry felt a rush of anger and 
hate toward the people who had tortured Mr. and 
Mrs. Longbottom. ... He remembered the jeers of the 
crowd as Crouch’s son and his companions had been 
dragged from the court by the dementors. ... He 
understood how they had felt. ... Then he 
remembered the milk-white face of the screaming boy 
and realized with a jolt that he had died a year later. 



It was Voldemort, Harry thought, staring up at the 
canopy of his bed in the darkness, it all came back to 
Voldemort. ... He was the one who had torn these 
families apart, who had ruined all these lives. ... 

Ron and Hermione were supposed to be studying for 
their exams, which would finish on the day of the 

Page | 672 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




third task, but they were putting most of their efforts 
into helping Harry prepare. 

“Don’t worry about it,” Hermione said shortly when 
Harry pointed this out to them and said he didn’t 
mind practicing on his own for a while, “at least we’ll 
get top marks in Defense Against the Dark Arts. We’d 
never have found out about all these hexes in class.” 

“Good training for when we’re all Aurors,” said Ron 
excitedly, attempting the Impediment Curse on a 
wasp that had buzzed into the room and making it 
stop dead in midair. 

The mood in the castle as they entered June became 
excited and tense again. Everyone was looking 
forward to the third task, which would take place a 
week before the end of term. Harry was practicing 
hexes at every available moment. He felt more 
confident about this task than either of the others. 
Difficult and dangerous though it would undoubtedly 
be, Moody was right: Harry had managed to find his 
way past monstrous creatures and enchanted 
barriers before now, and this time he had some 
notice, some chance to prepare himself for what lay 
ahead. 

Tired of walking in on Harry, Hermione, and Ron all 
over the school, Professor McGonagall had given them 
permission to use the empty Transfiguration 
classroom at lunchtimes. Harry had soon mastered 
the Impediment Curse, a spell to slow down and 
obstruct attackers; the Reductor Curse, which would 
enable him to blast solid objects out of his way; and 
the Four-Point Spell, a useful discovery of Hermione’s 
that would make his wand point due north, therefore 
enabling him to check whether he was going in the 
right direction within the maze. He was still having 
trouble with the Shield Charm, though. This was 
Page | 673 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




supposed to cast a temporary, invisible wall around 
himself that deflected minor curses; Hermione 
managed to shatter it with a well-placed Jelly-Legs 
Jinx, and Harry wobbled around the room for ten 
minutes afterward before she had looked up the 
counter-jinx. 

“You’re still doing really well, though,” Hermione said 
encouragingly, looking down her list and crossing off 
those spells they had already learned. “Some of these 
are bound to come in handy.” 

“Come and look at this,” said Ron, who was standing 
by the window. He was staring down onto the 
grounds. “What’s Malfoy doing?” 

Harry and Hermione went to see. Malfoy, Crabbe, and 
Goyle were standing in the shadow of a tree below. 
Crabbe and Goyle seemed to be keeping a lookout; 
both were smirking. Malfoy was holding his hand up 
to his mouth and speaking into it. 

“He looks like he’s using a walkie-talkie,” said Harry 
curiously. 

“He can’t be,” said Hermione, “I’ve told you, those 
sorts of things don’t work around Hogwarts. Come on, 
Harry,” she added briskly, turning away from the 
window and moving back into the middle of the room, 
“let’s try that Shield Charm again.” 



Sirius was sending daily owls now. Like Hermione, he 
seemed to want to concentrate on getting Harry 
through the last task before they concerned 
themselves with anything else. He reminded Harry in 
every letter that whatever might be going on outside 



Page | 674 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the walls of Hogwarts was not Harry’s responsibility, 
nor was it within his power to influence it. 



If Voldemort is really getting stronger again, he wrote, 
my priority is to ensure your safety. He cannot hope to 
lay hands on you while you are under Dumbledore’s 
protection, but all the same, take no risks : Concentrate 
on getting through that maze safely, and then we can 
turn our attention to other matters. 

Harry’s nerves mounted as June the twenty-fourth 
drew closer, but they were not as bad as those he had 
felt before the first and second tasks. For one thing, 
he was confident that, this time, he had done 
everything in his power to prepare for the task. For 
another, this was the final hurdle, and however well 
or badly he did, the tournament would at last be over, 
which would be an enormous relief. 

Breakfast was a very noisy affair at the Gryffindor 
table on the morning of the third task. The post owls 
appeared, bringing Harry a good-luck card from 
Sirius. It was only a piece of parchment, folded over 
and bearing a muddy paw print on its front, but 
Harry appreciated it all the same. A screech owl 
arrived for Hermione, carrying her morning copy of 
the Daily Prophet as usual. She unfolded the paper, 
glanced at the front page, and spat out a mouthful of 
pumpkin juice all over it. 

“What?” said Harry and Ron together, staring at her. 

“Nothing,” said Hermione quickly, trying to shove the 
paper out of sight, but Ron grabbed it. He stared at 
the headline and said, “No way. Not today. That old 
cow.” 

“What?” said Harry. “Rita Skeeter again?” 

Page | 675 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“No,” said Ron, and just like Hermione, he attempted 
to push the paper out of sight. 



“It’s about me, isn’t it?” said Harry. 

“No,” said Ron, in an entirely unconvincing tone. 

But before Harry could demand to see the paper, 
Draco Malfoy shouted across the Great Hall from the 
Slytherin table. 

“Hey, Potter! Potteri How’s your head? You feeling all 
right? Sure you’re not going to go berserk on us?” 

Malfoy was holding a copy of the Daily Prophet too. 
Slytherins up and down the table were sniggering, 
twisting in their seats to see Harry’s reaction. 

“Let me see it,” Harry said to Ron. “Give it here.” 

Very reluctantly, Ron handed over the newspaper. 
Harry turned it over and found himself staring at his 
own picture, beneath the banner headline: 

HARRY POTTER 

“DISTURBED AND DANGEROUS” 

The boy who defeated He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is 
unstable and possibly dangerous, writes Rita Skeeter, 
Special Correspondent. Alarming evidence has 
recently come to light about Harry Potter’s strange 
behavior, which casts doubts upon his suitability to 
compete in a demanding competition like the Triwizard 
Tournament, or even to attend Hogwarts School. 

Potter, the Daily Prophet can exclusively reveal, 
regularly collapses at school, and is often heard to 
complain of pain in the scar on his forehead (relic of the 

Page | 676 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




curse with which You-Know-Who attempted to kill him). 
On Monday last, midway through a Divination lesson, 
your Daily Prophet reporter witnessed Potter storming 
from the class, claiming that his scar was hurting too 
badly to continue studying. 

It is possible, say top experts at St. Mungo’s Hospital 
for Magical Maladies and Injuries, that Potter’s brain 
was affected by the attack inflicted upon him by You- 
Know-Who, and that his insistence that the scar is 
still hurting is an expression of his deep-seated 
confusion. 

“He might even be pretending,” said one specialist. 
“This could be a plea for attention.” 

The Daily Prophet, however, has unearthed worrying 
facts about Harry Potter thatAlbus Dumbledore, 
Headmaster of Hogwarts, has carefully concealed from 
the wizarding public. 

“Potter can speak Parseltongue, ” reveals Draco Malfoy, 
a Hogwarts fourth year. “There were a lot of attacks 
on students a couple of years ago, and most people 
thought Potter was behind them after they saw him 
lose his temper at a dueling club and set a snake on 
another boy. It was all hushed up, though. But he’s 
made friends with werewolves and giants too. We 
think he’d do anything for a bit of power.” 

Parseltongue, the ability to converse with snakes, has 
long been considered a Dark Art. Indeed, the most 
famous Parselmouth of our times is none other than 
You-Know-Who himself. A member of the Dark Force 
Defense League, who wished to remain unnamed, 
stated that he would regard any wizard who could 
speak Parseltongue “as worthy of investigation. 
Personally, I would be highly suspicious of anybody 
who could converse with snakes, as serpents are 
Page | 677 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




often used in the worst kinds of Dark Magic, and are 
historically associated with evildoers.” Similarly, 
“anyone who seeks out the company of such vicious 
creatures as werewolves and giants would appear to 
have a fondness for violence.” 

Albus Dumbledore should surely consider whether a 
boy such as this should be allowed to compete in the 
Triwizard Tournament. Some fear that Potter might 
resort to the Dark Arts in his desperation to win the 
tournament, the third task of which takes place this 
evening. 

“Gone off me a bit, hasn’t she?” said Harry lightly, 
folding up the paper. 

Over at the Slytherin table, Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle 
were laughing at him, tapping their heads with their 
fingers, pulling grotesquely mad faces, and waggling 
their tongues like snakes. 

“How did she know your scar hurt in Divination?” 

Ron said. “There’s no way she was there, there’s no 
way she could’ve heard — ” 

“The window was open,” said Harry. “I opened it to 
breathe.” 

“You were at the top of North Tower!” Hermione said. 
“Your voice couldn’t have carried all the way down to 
the grounds!” 

“Well, you’re the one who’s supposed to be 
researching magical methods of bugging!” said Harry. 
“You tell me how she did it!” 

“I’ve been trying!” said Hermione. “But I ... but ...” 



Page | 678 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




An odd, dreamy expression suddenly came over 
Hermione ’s face. She slowly raised a hand and ran 
her fingers through her hair. 

“Are you all right?” said Ron, frowning at her. 

“Yes,” said Hermione breathlessly. She ran her fingers 
through her hair again, and then held her hand up to 
her mouth, as though speaking into an invisible 
walkie-talkie. Harry and Ron stared at each other. 

“I’ve had an idea,” Hermione said, gazing into space. 

“I think I know . . . because then no one would be able 
to see ... even Moody ... and she’d have been able to 
get onto the window ledge ... but she’s not allowed ... 
she’s definitely not allowed ... I think we’ve got her! 
Just give me two seconds in the library — just to 
make sure!” 

With that, Hermione seized her school bag and 
dashed out of the Great Hall. 

“Oi!” Ron called after her. “We’ve got our History of 
Magic exam in ten minutes! Blimey,” he said, turning 
back to Harry, “she must really hate that Skeeter 
woman to risk missing the start of an exam. What’re 
you going to do in Binns’s class — read again?” 

Exempt from the end-of-term tests as a Triwizard 
champion, Harry had been sitting in the back of every 
exam class so far, looking up fresh hexes for the third 
task. 

“S’pose so,” Harry said to Ron; but just then, 

Professor McGonagall came walking alongside the 
Gryffindor table toward him. 

“Potter, the champions are congregating in the 
chamber off the Hall after breakfast,” she said. 

Page | 679 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“But the task’s not till tonight!” said Harry, 
accidentally spilling scrambled eggs down his front, 
afraid he had mistaken the time. 

“I’m aware of that, Potter,” she said. “The champions’ 
families are invited to watch the final task, you know. 
This is simply a chance for you to greet them.” 

She moved away. Harry gaped after her. 

“She doesn’t expect the Dursleys to turn up, does 
she?” he asked Ron blankly. 

“Dunno,” said Ron. “Harry, I’d better hurry, I’m going 
to be late for Binns. See you later.” 

Harry finished his breakfast in the emptying Great 
Hall. He saw Fleur Delacour get up from the 
Ravenclaw table and join Cedric as he crossed to the 
side chamber and entered. Krum slouched off to join 
them shortly afterward. Harry stayed where he was. 

He really didn’t want to go into the chamber. He had 
no family — no family who would turn up to see him 
risk his life, anyway. But just as he was getting up, 
thinking that he might as well go up to the library 
and do a spot more hex research, the door of the side 
chamber opened, and Cedric stuck his head out. 

“Harry, come on, they’re waiting for you!” 

Utterly perplexed, Harry got up. The Dursleys 
couldn’t possibly be here, could they? He walked 
across the Hall and opened the door into the 
chamber. 

Cedric and his parents were just inside the door. 
Viktor Krum was over in a corner, conversing with his 
dark-haired mother and father in rapid Bulgarian. He 
had inherited his father’s hooked nose. On the other 

Page | 680 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




side of the room, Fleur was jabbering away in French 
to her mother. Fleur’s little sister, Gabrielle, was 
holding her mother’s hand. She waved at Harry, who 
waved back, grinning. Then he saw Mrs. Weasley and 
Bill standing in front of the fireplace, beaming at him. 

“Surprise!” Mrs. Weasley said excitedly as he smiled 
broadly and walked over to them. “Thought we’d come 
and watch you, Harry!” She bent down and kissed 
him on the cheek. 

“You all right?” said Bill, grinning at Harry and 
shaking his hand. “Charlie wanted to come, but he 
couldn’t get time off. He said you were incredible 
against the Horntail.” 

Fleur Delacour, Harry noticed, was eyeing Bill with 
great interest over her mother’s shoulder. Harry could 
tell she had no objection whatsoever to long hair or 
earrings with fangs on them. 

“This is really nice of you,” Harry muttered to Mrs. 
Weasley. “I thought for a moment — the Dursleys — ” 

“Hmm,” said Mrs. Weasley, pursing her lips. She had 
always refrained from criticizing the Dursleys in front 
of Harry, but her eyes flashed every time they were 
mentioned. 

“It’s great being back here,” said Bill, looking around 
the chamber (Violet, the Fat Lady’s friend, winked at 
him from her frame). “Haven’t seen this place for five 
years. Is that picture of the mad knight still around? 
Sir Cadogan?” 

“Oh yeah,” said Harry, who had met Sir Cadogan the 
previous year. 

“And the Fat Lady?” said Bill. 

Page | 681 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“She was here in my time,” said Mrs. Weasley. “She 
gave me such a telling off one night when I got back 
to the dormitory at four in the morning — ” 

“What were you doing out of your dormitory at four in 
the morning?” said Bill, surveying his mother with 
amazement. 

Mrs. Weasley grinned, her eyes twinkling. 

“Your father and I had been for a nighttime stroll,” 
she said. “He got caught by Apollyon Pringle — he 
was the caretaker in those days — your father’s still 
got the marks.” 

“Fancy giving us a tour, Harry?” said Bill. 

“Yeah, okay,” said Harry, and they made their way 
back toward the door into the Great Hall. As they 
passed Amos Diggory, he looked around. 

“There you are, are you?” he said, looking Harry up 
and down. “Bet you’re not feeling quite as full of 
yourself now Cedric’s caught you up on points, are 
you?” 

“What?” said Harry. 

“Ignore him,” said Cedric in a low voice to Harry, 
frowning after his father. “He’s been angry ever since 
Rita Skeeter’s article about the Triwizard Tournament 
— you know, when she made out you were the only 
Hogwarts champion.” 

“Didn’t bother to correct her, though, did he?” said 
Amos Diggory, loudly enough for Harry to hear as he 
started to walk out of the door with Mrs. Weasley and 
Bill. “Still ... you’ll show him, Ced. Beaten him once 
before, haven’t you?” 

Page | 682 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Rita Skeeter goes out of her way to cause trouble, 
Amos!” Mrs. Weasley said angrily. “I would have 
thought you’d know that, working at the Ministry!” 

Mr. Diggory looked as though he was going to say 
something angry, but his wife laid a hand on his arm, 
and he merely shrugged and turned away. 

Harry had a very enjoyable morning walking over the 
sunny grounds with Bill and Mrs. Weasley, showing 
them the Beauxbatons carriage and the Durmstrang 
ship. Mrs. Weasley was intrigued by the Whomping 
Willow, which had been planted after she had left 
school, and reminisced at length about the 
gamekeeper before Hagrid, a man called Ogg. 

“How’s Percy?” Harry asked as they walked around 
the greenhouses. 

“Not good,” said Bill. 

“He’s very upset,” said Mrs. Weasley, lowering her 
voice and glancing around. “The Ministry wants to 
keep Mr. Crouch’s disappearance quiet, but Percy’s 
been hauled in for questioning about the instructions 
Mr. Crouch has been sending in. They seem to think 
there’s a chance they weren’t genuinely written by 
him. Percy’s been under a lot of strain. They’re not 
letting him fill in for Mr. Crouch as the fifth judge 
tonight. Cornelius Fudge is going to be doing it.” 

They returned to the castle for lunch. 

“Mum — Bill!” said Ron, looking stunned, as he 
joined the Gryffindor table. “What ’re you doing here?” 

“Come to watch Harry in the last task!” said Mrs. 
Weasley brightly. “I must say, it makes a lovely 
change, not having to cook. How was your exam?” 

Page | 683 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh ... okay,” said Ron. “Couldn’t remember all the 
goblin rebels’ names, so I invented a few. It’s all 
right,” he said, helping himself to a Cornish pasty, 
while Mrs. Weasley looked stern, “they’re all called 
stuff like Bodrod the Bearded and Urg the Unclean; it 
wasn’t hard.” 

Fred, George, and Ginny came to sit next to them too, 
and Harry was having such a good time he felt almost 
as though he were back at the Burrow; he had 
forgotten to worry about that evening’s task, and not 
until Hermione turned up, halfway through lunch, 
did he remember that she had had a brainwave about 
Rita Skeeter. 

“Are you going to tell us — ?” 

Hermione shook her head warningly and glanced at 
Mrs. Weasley. 

“Hello, Hermione,” said Mrs. Weasley, much more 
stiffly than usual. 

“Hello,” said Hermione, her smile faltering at the cold 
expression on Mrs. Weasley’s face. 

Harry looked between them, then said, “Mrs. Weasley, 
you didn’t believe that rubbish Rita Skeeter wrote in 
Witch Weekly, did you? Because Hermione ’s not my 
girlfriend.” 

“Oh!” said Mrs. Weasley. “No — of course I didn’t!” 

But she became considerably warmer toward 
Hermione after that. 

Harry, Bill, and Mrs. Weasley whiled away the 
afternoon with a long walk around the castle, and 
then returned to the Great Hall for the evening feast. 

Page | 684 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Ludo Bagman and Cornelius Fudge had joined the 
staff table now. Bagman looked quite cheerful, but 
Cornelius Fudge, who was sitting next to Madame 
Maxime, looked stern and was not talking. Madame 
Maxime was concentrating on her plate, and Harry 
thought her eyes looked red. Hagrid kept glancing 
along the table at her. 

There were more courses than usual, but Harry, who 
was starting to feel really nervous now, didn’t eat 
much. As the enchanted ceiling overhead began to 
fade from blue to a dusky purple, Dumbledore rose to 
his feet at the staff table, and silence fell. 

“Ladies and gentlemen, in five minutes’ time, I will be 
asking you to make your way down to the Quidditch 
field for the third and final task of the Triwizard 
Tournament. Will the champions please follow Mr. 
Bagman down to the stadium now.” 

Harry got up. The Gryffindors all along the table were 
applauding him; the Weasleys and Hermione all 
wished him good luck, and he headed off out of the 
Great Hall with Cedric, Fleur, and Viktor. 

“Feeling all right, Harry?” Bagman asked as they went 
down the stone steps onto the grounds. “Confident?” 

“I’m okay,” said Harry. It was sort of true; he was 
nervous, but he kept running over all the hexes and 
spells he had been practicing in his mind as they 
walked, and the knowledge that he could remember 
them all made him feel better. 

They walked onto the Quidditch field, which was now 
completely unrecognizable. A twenty-foot-high hedge 
ran all the way around the edge of it. There was a gap 
right in front of them: the entrance to the vast maze. 
The passage beyond it looked dark and creepy. 

Page | 685 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Five minutes later, the stands had begun to fill; the 
air was full of excited voices and the rumbling of feet 
as the hundreds of students filed into their seats. The 
sky was a deep, clear blue now, and the first stars 
were starting to appear. Hagrid, Professor Moody, 
Professor McGonagall, and Professor Flitwick came 
walking into the stadium and approached Bagman 
and the champions. They were wearing large, red, 
luminous stars on their hats, all except Hagrid, who 
had his on the back of his moleskin vest. 

“We are going to be patrolling the outside of the 
maze,” said Professor McGonagall to the champions. 
“If you get into difficulty, and wish to be rescued, 
send red sparks into the air, and one of us will come 
and get you, do you understand?” 

The champions nodded. 

“Off you go, then!” said Bagman brightly to the four 
patrollers. 

“Good luck, Harry,” Hagrid whispered, and the four of 
them walked away in different directions, to station 
themselves around the maze. Bagman now pointed 
his wand at his throat, muttered, “ Sonorus,” and his 
magically magnified voice echoed into the stands. 

“Ladies and gentlemen, the third and final task of the 
Triwizard Tournament is about to begin! Let me 
remind you how the points currently stand! Tied in 
first place, with eighty-five points each — Mr. Cedric 
Diggory and Mr. Harry Potter, both of Hogwarts 
School!” The cheers and applause sent birds from the 
Forbidden Forest fluttering into the darkening sky. 

“In second place, with eighty points — Mr. Viktor 
Krum, of Durmstrang Institute!” More applause. “And 
in third place — Miss Fleur Delacour, of Beauxbatons 
Academy!” 

Page | 686 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry could just make out Mrs. Weasley, Bill, Ron, 
and Hermione applauding Fleur politely, halfway up 
the stands. He waved up at them, and they waved 
back, beaming at him. 

“So ... on my whistle, Harry and Cedric!” said 
Bagman. “Three — two — one — ” 

He gave a short blast on his whistle, and Harry and 
Cedric hurried forward into the maze. 

The towering hedges cast black shadows across the 
path, and, whether because they were so tall and 
thick or because they had been enchanted, the sound 
of the surrounding crowd was silenced the moment 
they entered the maze. Harry felt almost as though he 
were underwater again. He pulled out his wand, 
muttered, “Lumos,” and heard Cedric do the same 
just behind him. 

After about fifty yards, they reached a fork. They 
looked at each other. 

“See you,” Harry said, and he took the left one, while 
Cedric took the right. 

Harry heard Bagman’s whistle for the second time. 
Krum had entered the maze. Harry sped up. His 
chosen path seemed completely deserted. He turned 
right, and hurried on, holding his wand high over his 
head, trying to see as far ahead as possible. Still, 
there was nothing in sight. 

Bagman’s whistle blew in the distance for the third 
time. All of the champions were now inside. 

Harry kept looking behind him. The old feeling that 
he was being watched was upon him. The maze was 



Page | 687 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




growing darker with every passing minute as the sky 
overhead deepened to navy. He reached a second fork. 

“ Point Me,” he whispered to his wand, holding it flat in 
his palm. 

The wand spun around once and pointed toward his 
right, into solid hedge. That way was north, and he 
knew that he needed to go northwest for the center of 
the maze. The best he could do was to take the left 
fork and go right again as soon as possible. 

The path ahead was empty too, and when Harry 
reached a right turn and took it, he again found his 
way unblocked. Harry didn’t know why, but the lack 
of obstacles was unnerving him. Surely he should 
have met something by now? It felt as though the 
maze were luring him into a false sense of security. 
Then he heard movement right behind him. He held 
out his wand, ready to attack, but its beam fell only 
upon Cedric, who had just hurried out of a path on 
the right-hand side. Cedric looked severely shaken. 
The sleeve of his robe was smoking. 

“Hagrid’s Blast-Ended Skrewts!” he hissed. “They’re 
enormous — I only just got away!” 

He shook his head and dived out of sight, along 
another path. Keen to put plenty of distance between 
himself and the skrewts, Harry hurried off again. 
Then, as he turned a corner, he saw ... a dementor 
gliding toward him. Twelve feet tall, its face hidden by 
its hood, its rotting, scabbed hands outstretched, it 
advanced, sensing its way blindly toward him. Harry 
could hear its rattling breath; he felt clammy coldness 
stealing over him, but knew what he had to do. ... 

He summoned the happiest thought he could, 
concentrated with all his might on the thought of 

Page | 688 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




getting out of the maze and celebrating with Ron and 
Hermione, raised his wand, and cried, “Expecto 
Patronum).” 

A silver stag erupted from the end of Harry’s wand 
and galloped toward the dementor, which fell back 
and tripped over the hem of its robes. ... Harry had 
never seen a dementor stumble. 

“Hang on!” he shouted, advancing in the wake of his 
silver Patronus. “You’re a boggart! Riddikulusl” 

There was a loud crack, and the shape-shifter 
exploded in a wisp of smoke. The silver stag faded 
from sight. Harry wished it could have stayed, he 
could have used some company . . . but he moved on, 
quickly and quietly as possible, listening hard, his 
wand held high once more. 

Left . . . right . . . left again . . . Twice he found himself 
facing dead ends. He did the Four-Point Spell again 
and found that he was going too far east. He turned 
back, took a right turn, and saw an odd golden mist 
floating ahead of him. 

Harry approached it cautiously, pointing the wand’s 
beam at it. This looked like some kind of 
enchantment. He wondered whether he might be able 
to blast it out of the way. 

“Reductol” he said. 

The spell shot straight through the mist, leaving it 
intact. He supposed he should have known better; the 
Reductor Curse was for solid objects. What would 
happen if he walked through the mist? Was it worth 
chancing it, or should he double back? 



Page | 689 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He was still hesitating when a scream shattered the 
silence. 



“Fleur?” Harry yelled. 

There was silence. He stared all around him. What 
had happened to her? Her scream seemed to have 
come from somewhere ahead. He took a deep breath 
and ran through the enchanted mist. 

The world turned upside down. Harry was hanging 
from the ground, with his hair on end, his glasses 
dangling off his nose, threatening to fall into the 
bottomless sky. He clutched them to the end of his 
nose and hung there, terrified. It felt as though his 
feet were glued to the grass, which had now become 
the ceiling. Below him the dark, star-spangled 
heavens stretched endlessly. He felt as though if he 
tried to move one of his feet, he would fall away from 
the earth completely. 

Think , he told himself, as all the blood rushed to his 
head, think ... 

But not one of the spells he had practiced had been 
designed to combat a sudden reversal of ground and 
sky. Did he dare move his foot? He could hear the 
blood pounding in his ears. He had two choices — try 
and move, or send up red sparks, and get rescued 
and disqualified from the task. 

He shut his eyes, so he wouldn’t be able to see the 
view of endless space below him, and pulled his right 
foot as hard as he could away from the grassy ceiling. 

Immediately, the world righted itself. Harry fell 
forward onto his knees onto the wonderfully solid 
ground. He felt temporarily limp with shock. He took 
a deep, steadying breath, then got up again and 

Page | 690 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




hurried forward, looking back over his shoulder as he 
ran away from the golden mist, which twinkled 
innocently at him in the moonlight. 

He paused at a junction of two paths and looked 
around for some sign of Fleur. He was sure it had 
been she who had screamed. What had she met? Was 
she all right? There was no sign of red sparks — did 
that mean she had got herself out of trouble, or was 
she in such trouble that she couldn’t reach her 
wand? Harry took the right fork with a feeling of 
increasing unease ... but at the same time, he 
couldn’t help thinking, One champion down ... 

The cup was somewhere close by, and it sounded as 
though Fleur was no longer in the running. He’d got 
this far, hadn’t he? What if he actually managed to 
win? Fleetingly, and for the first time since he’d found 
himself champion, he saw again that image of 
himself, raising the Triwizard Cup in front of the rest 
of the school. ... 

He met nothing for ten minutes, but kept running 
into dead ends. Twice he took the same wrong 
turning. Finally, he found a new route and started to 
jog along it, his wandlight waving, making his shadow 
flicker and distort on the hedge walls. Then he 
rounded another corner and found himself facing a 
Blast-Ended Skrewt. 

Cedric was right — it was enormous. Ten feet long, it 
looked more like a giant scorpion than anything. Its 
long sting was curled over its back. Its thick armor 
glinted in the light from Harry’s wand, which he 
pointed at it. 

“Stupefy'.” 



Page | 691 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The spell hit the skrewt’s armor and rebounded; 

Harry ducked just in time, but could smell burning 
hair; it had singed the top of his head. The skrewt 
issued a blast of fire from its end and flew forward 
toward him. 

“ Impedimental ” Harry yelled. The spell hit the skrewt’s 
armor again and ricocheted off; Harry staggered back 
a few paces and fell over. a IMPEDIMENT A\” 

The skrewt was inches from him when it froze — he 
had managed to hit it on its fleshy, shell-less 
underside. Panting, Harry pushed himself away from 
it and ran, hard, in the opposite direction — the 
Impediment Curse was not permanent; the skrewt 
would be regaining the use of its legs at any moment. 

He took a left path and hit a dead end, a right, and 
hit another; forcing himself to stop, heart hammering, 
he performed the Four-Point Spell again, 
backtracked, and chose a path that would take him 
northwest. 

He had been hurrying along the new path for a few 
minutes, when he heard something in the path 
running parallel to his own that made him stop dead. 

“What are you doing?” yelled Cedric’s voice. “What the 
hell d’you think you’re doing?” 

And then Harry heard Krum’s voice. 

“ Crucio \ ” 

The air was suddenly full of Cedric’s yells. Horrified, 
Harry began sprinting up his path, trying to find a 
way into Cedric’s. When none appeared, he tried the 
Reductor Curse again. It wasn’t very effective, but it 
burned a small hole in the hedge through which 
Page | 692 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry forced his leg, kicking at the thick brambles 
and branches until they broke and made an opening; 
he struggled through it, tearing his robes, and looking 
to his right, saw Cedric jerking and twitching on the 
ground, Krum standing over him. 

Harry pulled himself up and pointed his wand at 
Krum just as Krum looked up. Krum turned and 
began to run. 

“ Stupefy]” Harry yelled. 

The spell hit Krum in the back; he stopped dead in 
his tracks, fell forward, and lay motionless, facedown 
in the grass. Harry dashed over to Cedric, who had 
stopped twitching and was lying there panting, his 
hands over his face. 

“Are you all right?” Harry said roughly, grabbing 
Cedric’s arm. 

“Yeah,” panted Cedric. “Yeah ... I don’t believe it ... he 
crept up behind me. ... I heard him, I turned around, 
and he had his wand on me. ...” 

Cedric got up. He was still shaking. He and Harry 
looked down at Krum. 

“I can’t believe this ... I thought he was all right,” 
Harry said, staring at Krum. 

“So did I,” said Cedric. 

“Did you hear Fleur scream earlier?” said Harry. 

“Yeah,” said Cedric. “You don’t think Krum got her 
too?” 

“I don’t know,” said Harry slowly. 

Page | 693 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Should we leave him here?” Cedric muttered. 



“No,” said Harry. “I reckon we should send up red 
sparks. Someone’ll come and collect him ... otherwise 
he’ll probably be eaten by a skrewt.” 

“He’d deserve it,” Cedric muttered, but all the same, 
he raised his wand and shot a shower of red sparks 
into the air, which hovered high above Krum, marking 
the spot where he lay. 

Harry and Cedric stood there in the darkness for a 
moment, looking around them. Then Cedric said, 

“Well ... I s’pose we’d better go on . ...” 

“What?” said Harry. “Oh ... yeah ... right ...” 

It was an odd moment. He and Cedric had been 
briefly united against Krum — now the fact that they 
were opponents came back to Harry. The two of them 
proceeded up the dark path without speaking, then 
Harry turned left, and Cedric right. Cedric’s footsteps 
soon died away. 

Harry moved on, continuing to use the Four-Point 
Spell, making sure he was moving in the right 
direction. It was between him and Cedric now. His 
desire to reach the cup first was now burning 
stronger than ever, but he could hardly believe what 
he’d just seen Krum do. The use of an Unforgivable 
Curse on a fellow human being meant a life term in 
Azkaban, that was what Moody had told them. Krum 
surely couldn’t have wanted the Triwizard Cup that 
badly. ... Harry sped up. 

Every so often he hit more dead ends, but the 
increasing darkness made him feel sure he was 
getting near the heart of the maze. Then, as he strode 
down a long, straight path, he saw movement once 

Page | 694 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




again, and his beam of wandlight hit an extraordinary 
creature, one which he had only seen in picture form, 
in his Monster Book of Monsters. 

It was a sphinx. It had the body of an over-large lion: 
great clawed paws and a long yellowish tail ending in 
a brown tuft. Its head, however, was that of a woman. 
She turned her long, almond-shaped eyes upon Harry 
as he approached. He raised his wand, hesitating. 

She was not crouching as if to spring, but pacing 
from side to side of the path, blocking his progress. 
Then she spoke, in a deep, hoarse voice. 

“You are very near your goal. The quickest way is past 
me.” 

“So ... so will you move, please?” said Harry, knowing 
what the answer was going to be. 

“No,” she said, continuing to pace. “Not unless you 
can answer my riddle. Answer on your first guess — I 
let you pass. Answer wrongly — I attack. Remain 
silent — I will let you walk away from me unscathed.” 

Harry’s stomach slipped several notches. It was 
Hermione who was good at this sort of thing, not him. 
He weighed his chances. If the riddle was too hard, he 
could keep silent, get away from the sphinx 
unharmed, and try and find an alternative route to 
the center. 

“Okay,” he said. “Can I hear the riddle?” 

The sphinx sat down upon her hind legs, in the very 
middle of the path, and recited: 

“First think of the person who lives in disguise, 



Who deals in secrets and tells naught but lies. 

Page | 695 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Next, tell me what’s always the last thing to mend, 

The middle of middle and end of the end? 

And finally give me the sound often heard 
During the search for a hard-to-find word. 

Now string them together, and answer me this, 

Which creature would you be unwilling to kiss?” 

Harry gaped at her. 

“Could I have it again . . . more slowly?” he asked 
tentatively. 

She blinked at him, smiled, and repeated the poem. 

“All the clues add up to a creature I wouldn’t want to 
kiss?” Harry asked. 

She merely smiled her mysterious smile. Harry took 
that for a “yes.” Harry cast his mind around. There 
were plenty of animals he wouldn’t want to kiss; his 
immediate thought was a Blast-Ended Skrewt, but 
something told him that wasn’t the answer. He’d have 
to try and work out the clues. ... 

“A person in disguise,” Harry muttered, staring at her, 
“who lies ... er ... that’d be a — an imposter. No, 
that’s not my guess! A — a spy? I’ll come back to that 
. . . could you give me the next clue again, please?” 

She repeated the next lines of the poem. 

“ The last thing to mend,’ ” Harry repeated. “Er ... no 
idea ... ‘middle of middle’ ... could I have the last bit 
again?” 

Page | 696 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




She gave him the last four lines. 

“ The sound often heard during the search for a hard- 
to-find word,’ ” said Harry. “Er ... that’d be ... er ... 
hang on — ‘er’! Er’s a sound!” 

The sphinx smiled at him. 

“Spy ... er ... spy ... er ...” said Harry, pacing up and 
down. “A creature I wouldn’t want to kiss ... a spiderl” 

The sphinx smiled more broadly. She got up, 
stretched her front legs, and then moved aside for 
him to pass. 

“Thanks!” said Harry, and, amazed at his own 
brilliance, he dashed forward. 

He had to be close now, he had to be. ... His wand 
was telling him he was bang on course; as long as he 
didn’t meet anything too horrible, he might have a 
chance. ... 

Harry broke into a run. He had a choice of paths up 
ahead. “Point Mel” he whispered again to his wand, 
and it spun around and pointed him to the right- 
hand one. He dashed up this one and saw light 
ahead. 

The Triwizard Cup was gleaming on a plinth a 
hundred yards away. Suddenly a dark figure hurtled 
out onto the path in front of him. 

Cedric was going to get there first. Cedric was 
sprinting as fast as he could toward the cup, and 
Harry knew he would never catch up, Cedric was 
much taller, had much longer legs — 



Page | 697 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Then Harry saw something immense over a hedge to 
his left, moving quickly along a path that intersected 
with his own; it was moving so fast Cedric was about 
to run into it, and Cedric, his eyes on the cup, had 
not seen it — 

“Cedric!” Harry bellowed. “On your left!” 

Cedric looked around just in time to hurl himself past 
the thing and avoid colliding with it, but in his haste, 
he tripped. Harry saw Cedric’s wand fly out of his 
hand as a gigantic spider stepped into the path and 
began to bear down upon Cedric. 

“Stupefy'.” Harry yelled; the spell hit the spider’s 
gigantic, hairy black body, but for all the good it did, 
he might as well have thrown a stone at it; the spider 
jerked, scuttled around, and ran at Harry instead. 

“ Stupefy ! Impedimenta ! Stupefy !” 

But it was no use — the spider was either so large, or 
so magical, that the spells were doing no more than 
aggravating it. Harry had one horrifying glimpse of 
eight shining black eyes and razor-sharp pincers 
before it was upon him. 

He was lifted into the air in its front legs; struggling 
madly, he tried to kick it; his leg connected with the 
pincers and next moment he was in excruciating 
pain. He could hear Cedric yelling “Stupefy'.” too, but 
his spell had no more effect than Harry’s — Harry 
raised his wand as the spider opened its pincers once 
more and shouted “ Expelliarmus'.” 

It worked — the Disarming Spell made the spider 
drop him, but that meant that Harry fell twelve feet 
onto his already injured leg, which crumpled beneath 
him. Without pausing to think, he aimed high at the 

Page | 698 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




spider’s underbelly, as he had done with the skrewt, 
and shouted “Stupefyl” just as Cedric yelled the same 
thing. 

The two spells combined did what one alone had not: 
The spider keeled over sideways, flattening a nearby 
hedge, and strewing the path with a tangle of hairy 
legs. 

“Harry!” he heard Cedric shouting. “You all right? Did 
it fall on you?” 

“No,” Harry called back, panting. He looked down at 
his leg. It was bleeding freely. He could see some sort 
of thick, gluey secretion from the spider’s pincers on 
his torn robes. He tried to get up, but his leg was 
shaking badly and did not want to support his weight. 
He leaned against the hedge, gasping for breath, and 
looked around. 

Cedric was standing feet from the Triwizard Cup, 
which was gleaming behind him. 

“Take it, then,” Harry panted to Cedric. “Go on, take 
it. You’re there.” 

But Cedric didn’t move. He merely stood there, 
looking at Harry. Then he turned to stare at the cup. 
Harry saw the longing expression on his face in its 
golden light. Cedric looked around at Harry again, 
who was now holding onto the hedge to support 
himself. Cedric took a deep breath. 

“You take it. You should win. That’s twice you’ve 
saved my neck in here.” 

“That’s not how it’s supposed to work,” Harry said. He 
felt angry; his leg was very painful, he was aching all 
over from trying to throw off the spider, and after all 

Page | 699 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




his efforts, Cedric had beaten him to it, just as he’d 
beaten Harry to ask Cho to the ball. “The one who 
reaches the cup first gets the points. That’s you. I’m 
telling you, I’m not going to win any races on this leg.” 

Cedric took a few paces nearer to the Stunned spider, 
away from the cup, shaking his head. 

“No,” he said. 

“Stop being noble,” said Harry irritably. “Just take it, 
then we can get out of here.” 

Cedric watched Harry steadying himself, holding tight 
to the hedge. 

“You told me about the dragons,” Cedric said. “I 
would’ve gone down in the first task if you hadn’t told 
me what was coming.” 

“I had help on that too,” Harry snapped, trying to mop 
up his bloody leg with his robes. “You helped me with 
the egg — we’re square.” 

“I had help on the egg in the first place,” said Cedric. 

“We’re still square,” said Harry, testing his leg 
gingerly; it shook violently as he put weight on it; he 
had sprained his ankle when the spider had dropped 
him. 

“You should’ve got more points on the second task,” 
said Cedric mulishly. “You stayed behind to get all the 
hostages. I should’ve done that.” 

“I was the only one who was thick enough to take that 
song seriously!” said Harry bitterly. “Just take the 
cup!” 



Page | 700 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“No,” said Cedric. 



He stepped over the spider’s tangled legs to join 
Harry, who stared at him. Cedric was serious. He was 
walking away from the sort of glory Hufflepuff House 
hadn’t had in centuries. 

“Go on,” Cedric said. He looked as though this was 
costing him every ounce of resolution he had, but his 
face was set, his arms were folded, he seemed 
decided. 

Harry looked from Cedric to the cup. For one shining 
moment, he saw himself emerging from the maze, 
holding it. He saw himself holding the Triwizard Cup 
aloft, heard the roar of the crowd, saw Cho’s face 
shining with admiration, more clearly than he had 
ever seen it before ... and then the picture faded, and 
he found himself staring at Cedric’s shadowy, 
stubborn face. 

“Both of us,” Harry said. 

“What?” 

“Well take it at the same time. It’s still a Hogwarts 
victory. We’ll tie for it.” 

Cedric stared at Harry. He unfolded his arms. 

“You — you sure?” 

“Yeah,” said Harry. “Yeah ... we’ve helped each other 
out, haven’t we? We both got here. Let’s just take it 
together.” 

For a moment, Cedric looked as though he couldn’t 
believe his ears; then his face split in a grin. 

Page | 701 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




“You’re on,” he said. “Come here.” 

He grabbed Harry’s arm below the shoulder and 
helped Harry limp toward the plinth where the cup 
stood. When they had reached it, they both held a 
hand out over one of the cup’s gleaming handles. 

“On three, right?” said Harry. “One — two — three — ” 

He and Cedric both grasped a handle. 

Instantly, Harry felt a jerk somewhere behind his 
navel. His feet had left the ground. He could not 
unclench the hand holding the Triwizard Cup; it was 
pulling him onward in a howl of wind and swirling 
color, Cedric at his side. 



Page | 702 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






FLESH, BLOOD, AND BONE 

Harry felt his feet slam into the ground; his injured 
leg gave way, and he fell forward; his hand let go of 
the Triwizard Cup at last. He raised his head. 

“Where are we?” he said. 

Cedric shook his head. He got up, pulled Harry to his 
feet, and they looked around. 

They had left the Hogwarts grounds completely; they 
had obviously traveled miles — perhaps hundreds of 
miles — for even the mountains surrounding the 
castle were gone. They were standing instead in a 
dark and overgrown graveyard; the black outline of a 
small church was visible beyond a large yew tree to 
their right. A hill rose above them to their left. Harry 
could just make out the outline of a fine old house on 
the hillside. 

Cedric looked down at the Triwizard Cup and then up 
at Harry. 



Page | 703 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“Did anyone tell you the cup was a Portkey?” he 
asked. 

“Nope,” said Harry. He was looking around the 
graveyard. It was completely silent and slightly eerie. 
“Is this supposed to be part of the task?” 

“I dunno,” said Cedric. He sounded slightly nervous. 
“Wands out, d’you reckon?” 

“Yeah,” said Harry, glad that Cedric had made the 
suggestion rather than him. 

They pulled out their wands. Harry kept looking 
around him. He had, yet again, the strange feeling 
that they were being watched. 

“Someone’s coming,” he said suddenly. 

Squinting tensely through the darkness, they watched 
the figure drawing nearer, walking steadily toward 
them between the graves. Harry couldn’t make out a 
face, but from the way it was walking and holding its 
arms, he could tell that it was carrying something. 
Whoever it was, he was short, and wearing a hooded 
cloak pulled up over his head to obscure his face. And 
— several paces nearer, the gap between them closing 
all the time — Harry saw that the thing in the 
person’s arms looked like a baby ... or was it merely a 
bundle of robes? 

Harry lowered his wand slightly and glanced sideways 
at Cedric. Cedric shot him a quizzical look. They both 
turned back to watch the approaching figure. 

It stopped beside a towering marble headstone, only 
six feet from them. For a second, Harry and Cedric 
and the short figure simply looked at one another. 



Page | 704 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




And then, without warning, Harry’s scar exploded 
with pain. It was agony such as he had never felt in 
all his life; his wand slipped from his fingers as he put 
his hands over his face; his knees buckled; he was on 
the ground and he could see nothing at all; his head 
was about to split open. 

From far away, above his head, he heard a high, cold 
voice say, “Kill the spare.” 

A swishing noise and a second voice, which screeched 
the words to the night: “Avada KedavraV’ 

A blast of green light blazed through Harry’s eyelids, 
and he heard something heavy fall to the ground 
beside him; the pain in his scar reached such a pitch 
that he retched, and then it diminished; terrified of 
what he was about to see, he opened his stinging 
eyes. 

Cedric was lying spread-eagled on the ground beside 
him. He was dead. 

For a second that contained an eternity, Harry stared 
into Cedric’s face, at his open gray eyes, blank and 
expressionless as the windows of a deserted house, at 
his half-open mouth, which looked slightly surprised. 
And then, before Harry’s mind had accepted what he 
was seeing, before he could feel anything but numb 
disbelief, he felt himself being pulled to his feet. 

The short man in the cloak had put down his bundle, 
lit his wand, and was dragging Harry toward the 
marble headstone. Harry saw the name upon it 
flickering in the wandlight before he was forced 
around and slammed against it. 

TOM RIDDLE 



Page | 705 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The cloaked man was now conjuring tight cords 
around Harry, tying him from neck to ankles to the 
headstone. Harry could hear shallow, fast breathing 
from the depths of the hood; he struggled, and the 
man hit him — hit him with a hand that had a finger 
missing. And Harry realized who was under the hood. 
It was Wormtail. 

“You!” he gasped. 

But Wormtail, who had finished conjuring the ropes, 
did not reply; he was busy checking the tightness of 
the cords, his fingers trembling uncontrollably, 
fumbling over the knots. Once sure that Harry was 
bound so tightly to the headstone that he couldn’t 
move an inch, Wormtail drew a length of some black 
material from the inside of his cloak and stuffed it 
roughly into Harry’s mouth; then, without a word, he 
turned from Harry and hurried away. Harry couldn’t 
make a sound, nor could he see where Wormtail had 
gone; he couldn’t turn his head to see beyond the 
headstone; he could see only what was right in front 
of him. 

Cedric’s body was lying some twenty feet away. Some 
way beyond him, glinting in the starlight, lay the 
Triwizard Cup. Harry’s wand was on the ground at 
Cedric’s feet. The bundle of robes that Harry had 
thought was a baby was close by, at the foot of the 
grave. It seemed to be stirring fretfully. Harry watched 
it, and his scar seared with pain again . . . and he 
suddenly knew that he didn’t want to see what was in 
those robes ... he didn’t want that bundle opened. ... 

He could hear noises at his feet. He looked down and 
saw a gigantic snake slithering through the grass, 
circling the headstone where he was tied. Wormtail’s 
fast, wheezy breathing was growing louder again. It 
sounded as though he was forcing something heavy 
Page | 706 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




across the ground. Then he came back within Harry’s 
range of vision, and Harry saw him pushing a stone 
cauldron to the foot of the grave. It was full of what 
seemed to be water — Harry could hear it slopping 
around — and it was larger than any cauldron Harry 
had ever used; a great stone belly large enough for a 
full-grown man to sit in. 

The thing inside the bundle of robes on the ground 
was stirring more persistently, as though it was trying 
to free itself. Now Wormtail was busying himself at 
the bottom of the cauldron with a wand. Suddenly 
there were crackling flames beneath it. The large 
snake slithered away into the darkness. 

The liquid in the cauldron seemed to heat very fast. 
The surface began not only to bubble, but to send out 
fiery sparks, as though it were on fire. Steam was 
thickening, blurring the outline of Wormtail tending 
the fire. The movements beneath the robes became 
more agitated. And Harry heard the high, cold voice 
again. 

“Hurry\” 

The whole surface of the water was alight with sparks 
now. It might have been encrusted with diamonds. 

“It is ready, Master.” 

“Now ...” said the cold voice. 

Wormtail pulled open the robes on the ground, 
revealing what was inside them, and Harry let out a 
yell that was strangled in the wad of material blocking 
his mouth. 

It was as though Wormtail had flipped over a stone 
and revealed something ugly, slimy, and blind — but 

Page | 707 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




worse, a hundred times worse. The thing Wormtail 
had been carrying had the shape of a crouched 
human child, except that Harry had never seen 
anything less like a child. It was hairless and scaly - 
looking, a dark, raw, reddish black. Its arms and legs 
were thin and feeble, and its face — no child alive 
ever had a face like that — flat and snakelike, with 
gleaming red eyes. 

The thing seemed almost helpless; it raised its thin 
arms, put them around Wormtail’s neck, and 
Wormtail lifted it. As he did so, his hood fell back, 
and Harry saw the look of revulsion on Wormtail’s 
weak, pale face in the firelight as he carried the 
creature to the rim of the cauldron. For one moment, 
Harry saw the evil, flat face illuminated in the sparks 
dancing on the surface of the potion. And then 
Wormtail lowered the creature into the cauldron; 
there was a hiss, and it vanished below the surface; 
Harry heard its frail body hit the bottom with a soft 
thud. 

Let it drown, Harry thought, his scar burning almost 
past endurance, please ... let it drown. ... 

Wormtail was speaking. His voice shook; he seemed 
frightened beyond his wits. He raised his wand, 
closed his eyes, and spoke to the night. 

“Bone of the father, unknowingly given, you will renew 
your son!” 

The surface of the grave at Harry’s feet cracked. 
Horrified, Harry watched as a fine trickle of dust rose 
into the air at Wormtail’s command and fell softly into 
the cauldron. The diamond surface of the water broke 
and hissed; it sent sparks in all directions and turned 
a vivid, poisonous-looking blue. 



Page | 708 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




And now Wormtail was whimpering. He pulled a long, 
thin, shining silver dagger from inside his cloak. His 
voice broke into petrified sobs. 

“ Flesh — of the servant — w-willingly given — you will 
— revive — your master.” 

He stretched his right hand out in front of him — the 
hand with the missing finger. He gripped the dagger 
very tightly in his left hand and swung it upward. 

Harry realized what Wormtail was about to do a 
second before it happened — he closed his eyes as 
tightly as he could, but he could not block the scream 
that pierced the night, that went through Harry as 
though he had been stabbed with the dagger too. He 
heard something fall to the ground, heard Wormtail’s 
anguished panting, then a sickening splash, as 
something was dropped into the cauldron. Harry 
couldn’t stand to look ... but the potion had turned a 
burning red; the light of it shone through Harry’s 
closed eyelids... 

Wormtail was gasping and moaning with agony. Not 
until Harry felt Wormtail’s anguished breath on his 
face did he realize that Wormtail was right in front of 
him. 

“B-blood of the enemy ... forcibly taken ... you will ... 
resurrect your foe.” 

Harry could do nothing to prevent it, he was tied too 
tightly. ... Squinting down, struggling hopelessly at 
the ropes binding him, he saw the shining silver 
dagger shaking in Wormtail’s remaining hand. He felt 
its point penetrate the crook of his right arm and 
blood seeping down the sleeve of his torn robes. 
Wormtail, still panting with pain, fumbled in his 



Page | 709 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




pocket for a glass vial and held it to Harry’s cut, so 
that a dribble of blood fell into it. 

He staggered back to the cauldron with Harry’s blood. 
He poured it inside. The liquid within turned, 
instantly, a blinding white. Wormtail, his job done, 
dropped to his knees beside the cauldron, then 
slumped sideways and lay on the ground, cradling the 
bleeding stump of his arm, gasping and sobbing. 

The cauldron was simmering, sending its diamond 
sparks in all directions, so blindingly bright that it 
turned all else to velvety blackness. Nothing 
happened. ... 

Let it have drowned, Harry thought, let it have gone 
wrong. ... 

And then, suddenly, the sparks emanating from the 
cauldron were extinguished. A surge of white steam 
billowed thickly from the cauldron instead, 
obliterating everything in front of Harry, so that he 
couldn’t see Wormtail or Cedric or anything but vapor 
hanging in the air. . . It’s gone wrong, he thought . . . it’s 
drowned . . . please . . . please let it be dead. . . 

But then, through the mist in front of him, he saw, 
with an icy surge of terror, the dark outline of a man, 
tall and skeletally thin, rising slowly from inside the 
cauldron. 

“Robe me,” said the high, cold voice from behind the 
steam, and Wormtail, sobbing and moaning, still 
cradling his mutilated arm, scrambled to pick up the 
black robes from the ground, got to his feet, reached 
up, and pulled them one-handed over his master’s 
head. 



Page | 710 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




The thin man stepped out of the cauldron, staring at 
Harry . . . and Harry stared back into the face that had 
haunted his nightmares for three years. Whiter than a 
skull, with wide, livid scarlet eyes and a nose that 
was flat as a snake’s with slits for nostrils ... 

Lord Voldemort had risen again. 



Page | 711 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE DEATH EATERS 

Voldemort looked away from Harry and began 
examining his own body. His hands were like large, 
pale spiders; his long white fingers caressed his own 
chest, his arms, his face; the red eyes, whose pupils 
were slits, like a cat’s, gleamed still more brightly 
through the darkness. He held up his hands and 
flexed the fingers, his expression rapt and exultant. 

He took not the slightest notice of Wormtail, who lay 
twitching and bleeding on the ground, nor of the great 
snake, which had slithered back into sight and was 
circling Harry again, hissing. Voldemort slipped one of 
those unnaturally long-fingered hands into a deep 
pocket and drew out a wand. He caressed it gently 
too; and then he raised it, and pointed it at Wormtail, 
who was lifted off the ground and thrown against the 
headstone where Harry was tied; he fell to the foot of 
it and lay there, crumpled up and crying. Voldemort 
turned his scarlet eyes upon Harry, laughing a high, 
cold, mirthless laugh. 

Wormtail’s robes were shining with blood now; he had 
wrapped the stump of his arm in them. 

Page | 712 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



“My Lord ...” he choked, “my Lord ... you promised ... 
you did promise ...” 

“Hold out your arm,” said Voldemort lazily. 

“Oh Master ... thank you, Master ...” 

He extended the bleeding stump, but Voldemort 
laughed again. 

“The other arm, Wormtail.” 

“Master, please ... please ...” 

Voldemort bent down and pulled out Wormtail’s left 
arm; he forced the sleeve of Wormtail’s robes up past 
his elbow, and Harry saw something upon the skin 
there, something like a vivid red tattoo — a skull with 
a snake protruding from its mouth — the image that 
had appeared in the sky at the Quidditch World Cup: 
the Dark Mark. Voldemort examined it carefully, 
ignoring Wormtail’s uncontrollable weeping. 

“It is back,” he said softly, “they will all have noticed it 
... and now, we shall see ... now we shall know ...” 

He pressed his long white forefinger to the brand on 
Wormtail’s arm. 

The scar on Harry’s forehead seared with a sharp 
pain again, and Wormtail let out a fresh howl; 
Voldemort removed his fingers from Wormtail’s mark, 
and Harry saw that it had turned jet black. 

A look of cruel satisfaction on his face, Voldemort 
straightened up, threw back his head, and stared 
around at the dark graveyard. 



Page | 713 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“How many will be brave enough to return when they 
feel it?” he whispered, his gleaming red eyes fixed 
upon the stars. “And how many will be foolish enough 
to stay away?” 

He began to pace up and down before Harry and 
Wormtail, eyes sweeping the graveyard all the while. 
After a minute or so, he looked down at Harry again, 
a cruel smile twisting his snakelike face. 

“You stand, Harry Potter, upon the remains of my late 
father,” he hissed softly. “A Muggle and a fool ... very 
like your dear mother. But they both had their uses, 
did they not? Your mother died to defend you as a 
child . . . and I killed my father, and see how useful he 
has proved himself, in death. ...” 

Voldemort laughed again. Up and down he paced, 
looking all around him as he walked, and the snake 
continued to circle in the grass. 

“You see that house upon the hillside, Potter? My 
father lived there. My mother, a witch who lived here 
in this village, fell in love with him. But he abandoned 
her when she told him what she was. ... He didn’t like 
magic, my father . . . 

“He left her and returned to his Muggle parents before 
I was even born, Potter, and she died giving birth to 
me, leaving me to be raised in a Muggle orphanage ... 
but I vowed to find him ... I revenged myself upon 
him, that fool who gave me his name . . . Tom Riddle. 



Still he paced, his red eyes darting from grave to 
grave. 



Page | 714 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Listen to me, reliving family history ...” he said 
quietly, “why, I am growing quite sentimental. ... But 
look, Harry! My true family returns. ...” 

The air was suddenly full of the swishing of cloaks. 
Between graves, behind the yew tree, in every 
shadowy space, wizards were Apparating. All of them 
were hooded and masked. And one by one they moved 
forward . . . slowly, cautiously, as though they could 
hardly believe their eyes. Voldemort stood in silence, 
waiting for them. Then one of the Death Eaters fell to 
his knees, crawled toward Voldemort, and kissed the 
hem of his black robes. 

“Master ... Master ...” he murmured. 

The Death Eaters behind him did the same; each of 
them approaching Voldemort on his knees and 
kissing his robes, before backing away and standing 
up, forming a silent circle, which enclosed Tom 
Riddle’s grave, Harry, Voldemort, and the sobbing and 
twitching heap that was Wormtail. Yet they left gaps 
in the circle, as though waiting for more people. 
Voldemort, however, did not seem to expect more. He 
looked around at the hooded faces, and though there 
was no wind, a rustling seemed to run around the 
circle, as though it had shivered. 

“Welcome, Death Eaters,” said Voldemort quietly. 
“Thirteen years ... thirteen years since last we met. 

Yet you answer my call as though it were yesterday. 

... We are still united under the Dark Mark, then! Or 
are we?” 

He put back his terrible face and sniffed, his slit-like 
nostrils widening. 

“I smell guilt,” he said. “There is a stench of guilt 
upon the air.” 

Page | 715 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




A second shiver ran around the circle, as though each 
member of it longed, but did not dare, to step back 
from him. 

“I see you all, whole and healthy, with your powers 
intact — such prompt appearances! — and I ask 
myself . . . why did this band of wizards never come to 
the aid of their master, to whom they swore eternal 
loyalty?” 

No one spoke. No one moved except Wormtail, who 
was upon the ground, still sobbing over his bleeding 
arm. 

“And I answer myself,” whispered Voldemort, “they 
must have believed me broken, they thought I was 
gone. They slipped back among my enemies, and they 
pleaded innocence, and ignorance, and bewitchment. 



“And then I ask myself, but how could they have 
believed I would not rise again? They, who knew the 
steps I took, long ago, to guard myself against mortal 
death? They, who had seen proofs of the immensity of 
my power in the times when I was mightier than any 
wizard living? 

“And I answer myself, perhaps they believed a still 
greater power could exist, one that could vanquish 
even Lord Voldemort ... perhaps they now pay 
allegiance to another . . . perhaps that champion of 
commoners, of Mudbloods and Muggles, Albus 
Dumbledore?” 

At the mention of Dumbledore’s name, the members 
of the circle stirred, and some muttered and shook 
their heads. Voldemort ignored them. 



Page | 716 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“It is a disappointment to me ... I confess myself 
disappointed. ...” 

One of the men suddenly flung himself forward, 
breaking the circle. Trembling from head to foot, he 
collapsed at Voldemort’s feet. 

“Master!” he shrieked, “Master, forgive me! Forgive us 
all!” 

Voldemort began to laugh. He raised his wand. 

“ Cruciol ” 

The Death Eater on the ground writhed and shrieked; 
Harry was sure the sound must carry to the houses 
around. ... Let the police come, he thought desperately 
... anyone ... anything ... 



Voldemort raised his wand. The tortured Death Eater 
lay flat upon the ground, gasping. 

“Get up, Avery,” said Voldemort softly. “Stand up. You 
ask for forgiveness? I do not forgive. I do not forget. 
Thirteen long years ... I want thirteen years’ 
repayment before I forgive you. Wormtail here has 
paid some of his debt already, have you not, 
Wormtail?” 

He looked down at Wormtail, who continued to sob. 

“You returned to me, not out of loyalty, but out of fear 
of your old friends. You deserve this pain, Wormtail. 
You know that, don’t you?” 

“Yes, Master,” moaned Wormtail, “please, Master ... 
please ...” 



Page | 717 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Yet you helped return me to my body,” said 
Voldemort coolly, watching Wormtail sob on the 
ground. “Worthless and traitorous as you are, you 
helped me . . . and Lord Voldemort rewards his 
helpers. ...” 

Voldemort raised his wand again and whirled it 
through the air. A streak of what looked like molten 
silver hung shining in the wand’s wake. Momentarily 
shapeless, it writhed and then formed itself into a 
gleaming replica of a human hand, bright as 
moonlight, which soared downward and fixed itself 
upon Wormtail’s bleeding wrist. 

Wormtail’s sobbing stopped abruptly. His breathing 
harsh and ragged, he raised his head and stared in 
disbelief at the silver hand, now attached seamlessly 
to his arm, as though he were wearing a dazzling 
glove. He flexed the shining fingers, then, trembling, 
picked up a small twig on the ground and crushed it 
into powder. 

“My Lord,” he whispered. “Master ... it is beautiful ... 
thank you ... thank you. ...” 

He scrambled forward on his knees and kissed the 
hem of Voldemort’s robes. 

“May your loyalty never waver again, Wormtail,” said 
Voldemort. 

“No, my Lord ... never, my Lord ...” 

Wormtail stood up and took his place in the circle, 
staring at his powerful new hand, his face still 
shining with tears. Voldemort now approached the 
man on Wormtail’s right. 



Page | 718 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Lucius, my slippery friend,” he whispered, halting 
before him. “I am told that you have not renounced 
the old ways, though to the world you present a 
respectable face. You are still ready to take the lead in 
a spot of Muggle-torture, I believe? Yet you never tried 
to find me, Lucius. ... Your exploits at the Quidditch 
World Cup were fun, I daresay ... but might not your 
energies have been better directed toward finding and 
aiding your master?” 

“My Lord, I was constantly on the alert,” came Lucius 
Malfoy’s voice swiftly from beneath the hood. “Had 
there been any sign from you, any whisper of your 
whereabouts, I would have been at your side 
immediately, nothing could have prevented me — ” 

“And yet you ran from my Mark, when a faithful 
Death Eater sent it into the sky last summer?” said 
Voldemort lazily, and Mr. Malfoy stopped talking 
abruptly. “Yes, I know all about that, Lucius. ... You 
have disappointed me. ... I expect more faithful 
service in the future.” 

“Of course, my Lord, of course. ... You are merciful, 
thank you. ...” 

Voldemort moved on, and stopped, staring at the 
space — large enough for two people — that 
separated Malfoy and the next man. 

“The Lestranges should stand here,” said Voldemort 
quietly. “But they are entombed in Azkaban. They 
were faithful. They went to Azkaban rather than 
renounce me. ... When Azkaban is broken open, the 
Lestranges will be honored beyond their dreams. The 
dementors will join us ... they are our natural allies ... 
we will recall the banished giants ... I shall have all 
my devoted servants returned to me, and an army of 
creatures whom all fear. ...” 

Page | 719 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He walked on. Some of the Death Eaters he passed in 
silence, but he paused before others and spoke to 
them. 

“Macnair . . . destroying dangerous beasts for the 
Ministry of Magic now, Wormtail tells me? You shall 
have better victims than that soon, Macnair. Lord 
Voldemort will provide. ...” 

“Thank you, Master ... thank you,” murmured 
Macnair. 

“And here” — Voldemort moved on to the two largest 
hooded figures — “we have Crabbe . . . you will do 
better this time, will you not, Crabbe? And you, 
Goyle?” 

They bowed clumsily, muttering dully. 

“Yes, Master ...” 

“We will, Master. ...” 

“The same goes for you, Nott,” said Voldemort quietly 
as he walked past a stooped figure in Mr. Goyle ’s 
shadow. 

“My Lord, I prostrate myself before you, I am your 
most faithful — ” 

“That will do,” said Voldemort. 

He had reached the largest gap of all, and he stood 
surveying it with his blank, red eyes, as though he 
could see people standing there. 

“And here we have six missing Death Eaters . . . three 
dead in my service. One, too cowardly to return ... he 
will pay. One, who I believe has left me forever ... he 

Page | 720 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




will be killed, of course ... and one, who remains my 
most faithful servant, and who has already reentered 
my service.” 

The Death Eaters stirred, and Harry saw their eyes 
dart sideways at one another through their masks. 

“He is at Hogwarts, that faithful servant, and it was 
through his efforts that our young friend arrived here 
tonight. ... 

“Yes,” said Voldemort, a grin curling his lipless mouth 
as the eyes of the circle flashed in Harry’s direction. 
“Harry Potter has kindly joined us for my rebirthing 
party. One might go so far as to call him my guest of 
honor.” 

There was a silence. Then the Death Eater to the right 
of Wormtail stepped forward, and Lucius Malfoy’s 
voice spoke from under the mask. 

“Master, we crave to know . . . we beg you to tell us . . . 
how you have achieved this . . . this miracle . . . how 
you managed to return to us. ...” 

“Ah, what a story it is, Lucius,” said Voldemort. “And 
it begins — and ends — with my young friend here.” 

He walked lazily over to stand next to Harry, so that 
the eyes of the whole circle were upon the two of 
them. The snake continued to circle. 

“You know, of course, that they have called this boy 
my downfall?” Voldemort said softly, his red eyes 
upon Harry, whose scar began to burn so fiercely that 
he almost screamed in agony. “You all know that on 
the night I lost my powers and my body, I tried to kill 
him. His mother died in the attempt to save him — 
and unwittingly provided him with a protection I 
Page | 721 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




admit I had not foreseen. ... I could not touch the 
boy.” 

Voldemort raised one of his long white fingers and put 
it very close to Harry’s cheek. 

“His mother left upon him the traces of her sacrifice. 

. . . This is old magic, I should have remembered it, I 
was foolish to overlook it . . . but no matter. I can 
touch him now.” 

Harry felt the cold tip of the long white finger touch 
him, and thought his head would burst with the pain. 
Voldemort laughed softly in his ear, then took the 
finger away and continued addressing the Death 
Eaters. 

“I miscalculated, my friends, I admit it. My curse was 
deflected by the woman’s foolish sacrifice, and it 
rebounded upon myself. Aaah . . . pain beyond pain, 
my friends; nothing could have prepared me for it. I 
was ripped from my body, I was less than spirit, less 
than the meanest ghost ... but still, I was alive. What 
I was, even I do not know ... I, who have gone further 
than anybody along the path that leads to 
immortality. You know my goal — to conquer death. 
And now, I was tested, and it appeared that one or 
more of my experiments had worked . . . for I had not 
been killed, though the curse should have done it. 
Nevertheless, I was as powerless as the weakest 
creature alive, and without the means to help myself 
. . . for I had no body, and every spell that might have 
helped me required the use of a wand. ... 

“I remember only forcing myself, sleeplessly, 
endlessly, second by second, to exist. ... I settled in a 
faraway place, in a forest, and I waited. ... Surely, one 
of my faithful Death Eaters would try and find me . . . 
one of them would come and perform the magic I 
Page | 722 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




could not, to restore me to a body . . . but I waited in 
vain. ...” 

The shiver ran once more around the circle of 
listening Death Eaters. Voldemort let the silence 
spiral horribly before continuing. 

“Only one power remained to me. I could possess the 
bodies of others. But I dared not go where other 
humans were plentiful, for I knew that the Aurors 
were still abroad and searching for me. I sometimes 
inhabited animals — snakes, of course, being my 
preference — but I was little better off inside them 
than as pure spirit, for their bodies were ill adapted to 
perform magic ... and my possession of them 
shortened their lives; none of them lasted long. ... 

“Then . . . four years ago . . . the means for my return 
seemed assured. A wizard — young, foolish, and 
gullible — wandered across my path in the forest I 
had made my home. Oh, he seemed the very chance I 
had been dreaming of . . . for he was a teacher at 
Dumbledore’s school ... he was easy to bend to my 
will ... he brought me back to this country, and after 
a while, I took possession of his body, to supervise 
him closely as he carried out my orders. But my plan 
failed. I did not manage to steal the Sorcerer’s Stone. I 
was not to be assured immortal life. I was thwarted ... 
thwarted, once again, by Harry Potter. ...” 

Silence once more; nothing was stirring, not even the 
leaves on the yew tree. The Death Eaters were quite 
motionless, the glittering eyes in their masks fixed 
upon Voldemort, and upon Harry. 

“The servant died when I left his body, and I was left 
as weak as ever I had been,” Voldemort continued. “I 
returned to my hiding place far away, and I will not 
pretend to you that I didn’t then fear that I might 

Page | 723 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




never regain my powers. ... Yes, that was perhaps my 
darkest hour ... I could not hope that I would be sent 
another wizard to possess ... and I had given up hope, 
now, that any of my Death Eaters cared what had 
become of me. ...” 

One or two of the masked wizards in the circle moved 
uncomfortably, but Voldemort took no notice. 

“And then, not even a year ago, when I had almost 
abandoned hope, it happened at last ... a servant 
returned to me. Wormtail here, who had faked his 
own death to escape justice, was driven out of hiding 
by those he had once counted friends, and decided to 
return to his master. He sought me in the country 
where it had long been rumored I was hiding . . . 
helped, of course, by the rats he met along the way. 
Wormtail has a curious affinity with rats, do you not, 
Wormtail? His filthy little friends told him there was a 
place, deep in an Albanian forest, that they avoided, 
where small animals like themselves had met their 
deaths by a dark shadow that possessed them. ... 

“But his journey back to me was not smooth, was it, 
Wormtail? For, hungry one night, on the edge of the 
very forest where he had hoped to find me, he 
foolishly stopped at an inn for some food . . . and who 
should he meet there, but one Bertha Jorkins, a 
witch from the Ministry of Magic. 

“Now see the way that fate favors Lord Voldemort. 

This might have been the end of Wormtail, and of my 
last hope for regeneration. But Wormtail — displaying 
a presence of mind I would never have expected from 
him — convinced Bertha Jorkins to accompany him 
on a nighttime stroll. He overpowered her ... he 
brought her to me. And Bertha Jorkins, who might 
have ruined all, proved instead to be a gift beyond my 



Page | 724 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




wildest dreams . . . for — with a little persuasion — she 
became a veritable mine of information. 

“She told me that the Triwizard Tournament would be 
played at Hogwarts this year. She told me that she 
knew of a faithful Death Eater who would be only too 
willing to help me, if I could only contact him. She 
told me many things . . . but the means I used to break 
the Memory Charm upon her were powerful, and 
when I had extracted all useful information from her, 
her mind and body were both damaged beyond repair. 
She had now served her purpose. I could not possess 
her. I disposed of her.” 

Voldemort smiled his terrible smile, his red eyes 
blank and pitiless. 

“Wormtail’s body, of course, was ill adapted for 
possession, as all assumed him dead, and would 
attract far too much attention if noticed. However, he 
was the able-bodied servant I needed, and, poor 
wizard though he is, Wormtail was able to follow the 
instructions I gave him, which would return me to a 
rudimentary, weak body of my own, a body I would be 
able to inhabit while awaiting the essential 
ingredients for true rebirth ... a spell or two of my 
own invention ... a little help from my dear Nagini,” 
Voldemort’s red eyes fell upon the continually circling 
snake, “a potion concocted from unicorn blood, and 
the snake venom Nagini provided ... I was soon 
returned to an almost human form, and strong 
enough to travel. 

“There was no hope of stealing the Sorcerer’s Stone 
anymore, for I knew that Dumbledore would have 
seen to it that it was destroyed. But I was willing to 
embrace mortal life again, before chasing immortality. 
I set my sights lower ... I would settle for my old body 
back again, and my old strength. 

Page | 725 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“I knew that to achieve this — it is an old piece of 
Dark Magic, the potion that revived me tonight — I 
would need three powerful ingredients. Well, one of 
them was already at hand, was it not, Wormtail? 

Flesh given by a servant. ... 

“My father’s bone, naturally, meant that we would 
have to come here, where he was buried. But the 
blood of a foe ... Wormtail would have had me use any 
wizard, would you not, Wormtail? Any wizard who 
had hated me ... as so many of them still do. But I 
knew the one I must use, if I was to rise again, more 
powerful than I had been when I had fallen. I wanted 
Harry Potter’s blood. I wanted the blood of the one 
who had stripped me of power thirteen years ago . . . 
for the lingering protection his mother once gave him 
would then reside in my veins too. ... 

“But how to get at Harry Potter? For he has been 
better protected than I think even he knows, 
protected in ways devised by Dumbledore long ago, 
when it fell to him to arrange the boy’s future. 
Dumbledore invoked an ancient magic, to ensure the 
boy’s protection as long as he is in his relations’ care. 
Not even I can touch him there. ... Then, of course, 
there was the Quidditch World Cup. ... I thought his 
protection might be weaker there, away from his 
relations and Dumbledore, but I was not yet strong 
enough to attempt kidnap in the midst of a horde of 
Ministry wizards. And then, the boy would return to 
Hogwarts, where he is under the crooked nose of that 
Muggle-loving fool from morning until night. So how 
could I take him? 

“Why ... by using Bertha Jorkins’s information, of 
course. Use my one faithful Death Eater, stationed at 
Hogwarts, to ensure that the boy’s name was entered 
into the Goblet of Fire. Use my Death Eater to ensure 
that the boy won the tournament — that he touched 
Page | 726 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the Triwizard Cup first — the cup which my Death 
Eater had turned into a Portkey, which would bring 
him here, beyond the reach of Dumbledore’s help and 
protection, and into my waiting arms. And here he is 
... the boy you all believed had been my downfall...” 

Voldemort moved slowly forward and turned to face 
Harry. He raised his wand. 

“Crucio\” 

It was pain beyond anything Harry had ever 
experienced; his very bones were on fire; his head was 
surely splitting along his scar; his eyes were rolling 
madly in his head; he wanted it to end ... to black out 
...to die ... 

And then it was gone. He was hanging limply in the 
ropes binding him to the headstone of Voldemort’s 
father, looking up into those bright red eyes through 
a kind of mist. The night was ringing with the sound 
of the Death Eaters’ laughter. 

“You see, I think, how foolish it was to suppose that 
this boy could ever have been stronger than me,” said 
Voldemort. “But I want there to be no mistake in 
anybody’s mind. Harry Potter escaped me by a lucky 
chance. And I am now going to prove my power by 
killing him, here and now, in front of you all, when 
there is no Dumbledore to help him, and no mother to 
die for him. I will give him his chance. He will be 
allowed to fight, and you will be left in no doubt 
which of us is the stronger. Just a little longer, 
Nagini,” he whispered, and the snake glided away 
through the grass to where the Death Eaters stood 
watching. 

“Now untie him, Wormtail, and give him back his 
wand.” 

Page | 727 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






PRIORI INCANTATEM 

Wormtail approached Harry, who scrambled to find 
his feet, to support his own weight before the ropes 
were untied. Wormtail raised his new silver hand, 
pulled out the wad of material gagging Harry, and 
then, with one swipe, cut through the bonds tying 
Harry to the gravestone. 

There was a split second, perhaps, when Harry might 
have considered running for it, but his injured leg 
shook under him as he stood on the overgrown grave, 
as the Death Eaters closed ranks, forming a tighter 
circle around him and Voldemort, so that the gaps 
where the missing Death Eaters should have stood 
were filled. Wormtail walked out of the circle to the 
place where Cedric’s body lay and returned with 
Harry’s wand, which he thrust roughly into Harry’s 
hand without looking at him. Then Wormtail resumed 
his place in the circle of watching Death Eaters. 

“You have been taught how to duel, Harry Potter?” 
said Voldemort softly, his red eyes glinting through 
the darkness. 

Page | 728 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



At these words Harry remembered, as though from a 
former life, the dueling club at Hogwarts he had 
attended briefly two years ago. ... All he had learned 
there was the Disarming Spell, “ Expelliarmus” ... and 
what use would it be to deprive Voldemort of his 
wand, even if he could, when he was surrounded by 
Death Eaters, outnumbered by at least thirty to one? 
He had never learned anything that could possibly fit 
him for this. He knew he was facing the thing against 
which Moody had always warned . . . the un-blockable 
Avada Kedavra curse — and Voldemort was right — 
his mother was not here to die for him this time. ... 

He was quite unprotected. ... 

“We bow to each other, Harry,” said Voldemort, 
bending a little, but keeping his snakelike face 
upturned to Harry. “Come, the niceties must be 
observed. ... Dumbledore would like you to show 
manners. ... Bow to death, Harry. ...” 

The Death Eaters were laughing again. Voldemort’s 
lipless mouth was smiling. Harry did not bow. He was 
not going to let Voldemort play with him before killing 
him ... he was not going to give him that satisfaction. 



“I said, bow,” Voldemort said, raising his wand — and 
Harry felt his spine curve as though a huge, invisible 
hand were bending him ruthlessly forward, and the 
Death Eaters laughed harder than ever. 

“Very good,” said Voldemort softly, and as he raised 
his wand the pressure bearing down upon Harry lifted 
too. “And now you face me, like a man ... straight- 
backed and proud, the way your father died. ... 

“And now — we duel.” 



Page | 729 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Voldemort raised his wand, and before Harry could do 
anything to defend himself, before he could even 
move, he had been hit again by the Cruciatus Curse. 
The pain was so intense, so all-consuming, that he no 
longer knew where he was. ... White-hot knives were 
piercing every inch of his skin, his head was surely 
going to burst with pain, he was screaming more 
loudly than he’d ever screamed in his life — 

And then it stopped. Harry rolled over and scrambled 
to his feet; he was shaking as uncontrollably as 
Wormtail had done when his hand had been cut off; 
he staggered sideways into the wall of watching Death 
Eaters, and they pushed him away, back toward 
Voldemort. 

“A little break,” said Voldemort, the slit-like nostrils 
dilating with excitement, “a little pause . . . That hurt, 
didn’t it, Harry? You don’t want me to do that again, 
do you?” 

Harry didn’t answer. He was going to die like Cedric, 
those pitiless red eyes were telling him so ... he was 
going to die, and there was nothing he could do about 
it... but he wasn’t going to play along. He wasn’t going 
to obey Voldemort ... he wasn’t going to beg. ... 

“I asked you whether you want me to do that again,” 
said Voldemort softly. “Answer me! ImperioV’ 

And Harry felt, for the third time in his life, the 
sensation that his mind had been wiped of all 
thought. ... Ah, it was bliss, not to think, it was as 
though he were floating, dreaming ... just answer no 
. . . say no ... just answer no. . . . 

I will not, said a stronger voice, in the back of his 
head, I won’t answer. ... 



Page | 730 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Just answer no. ... 



I won’t do it, I won’t say it. ... 

Just answer no. ... 

“I WONT!” 

And these words burst from Harry’s mouth; they 
echoed through the graveyard, and the dream state 
was lifted as suddenly as though cold water had been 
thrown over him — back rushed the aches that the 
Cruciatus Curse had left all over his body — back 
rushed the realization of where he was, and what he 
was facing. ... 

“You won’t?” said Voldemort quietly, and the Death 
Eaters were not laughing now. “You won’t say no? 
Harry, obedience is a virtue I need to teach you before 
you die. ... Perhaps another little dose of pain?” 

Voldemort raised his wand, but this time Harry was 
ready; with the reflexes born of his Quidditch 
training, he flung himself sideways onto the ground; 
he rolled behind the marble headstone of Voldemort’s 
father, and he heard it crack as the curse missed 
him. 

“We are not playing hide-and-seek, Harry,” said 
Voldemort’s soft, cold voice, drawing nearer, as the 
Death Eaters laughed. “You cannot hide from me. 

Does this mean you are tired of our duel? Does this 
mean that you would prefer me to finish it now, 

Harry? Come out, Harry . . . come out and play, then 
...it will be quick ... it might even be painless ... I 
would not know ... I have never died. ...” 

Harry crouched behind the headstone and knew the 
end had come. There was no hope ... no help to be 

Page | 731 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




had. And as he heard Voldemort draw nearer still, he 
knew one thing only, and it was beyond fear or 
reason: He was not going to die crouching here like a 
child playing hide-and-seek; he was not going to die 
kneeling at Voldemort’s feet ... he was going to die 
upright like his father, and he was going to die trying 
to defend himself, even if no defense was possible. ... 

Before Voldemort could stick his snakelike face 
around the headstone, Harry stood up ... he gripped 
his wand tightly in his hand, thrust it out in front of 
him, and threw himself around the headstone, facing 
Voldemort. 

Voldemort was ready. As Harry shouted, 

“ ExpelliarmusV’ Voldemort cried, “Avada KedavraV’ 

A jet of green light issued from Voldemort’s wand just 
as a jet of red light blasted from Harry’s — they met 
in midair — and suddenly Harry’s wand was vibrating 
as though an electric charge were surging through it; 
his hand seized up around it; he couldn’t have 
released it if he’d wanted to — and a narrow beam of 
light connected the two wands, neither red nor green, 
but bright, deep gold. Harry, following the beam with 
his astonished gaze, saw that Voldemort’s long white 
fingers too were gripping a wand that was shaking 
and vibrating. 

And then — nothing could have prepared Harry for 
this — he felt his feet lift from the ground. He and 
Voldemort were both being raised into the air, their 
wands still connected by that thread of shimmering 
golden light. They glided away from the tombstone of 
Voldemort’s father and then came to rest on a patch 
of ground that was clear and free of graves. ... The 
Death Eaters were shouting; they were asking 
Voldemort for instructions; they were closing in, 
reforming the circle around Harry and Voldemort, the 
Page | 732 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




snake slithering at their heels, some of them drawing 
their wands — 



The golden thread connecting Harry and Voldemort 
splintered; though the wands remained connected, a 
thousand more beams arced high over Harry and 
Voldemort, crisscrossing all around them, until they 
were enclosed in a golden, dome-shaped web, a cage 
of light, beyond which the Death Eaters circled like 
jackals, their cries strangely muffled now. ... 

“Do nothing!” Voldemort shrieked to the Death 
Eaters, and Harry saw his red eyes wide with 
astonishment at what was happening, saw him 
fighting to break the thread of light still connecting 
his wand with Harry’s; Harry held onto his wand 
more tightly, with both hands, and the golden thread 
remained unbroken. “Do nothing unless I command 
you!” Voldemort shouted to the Death Eaters. 

And then an unearthly and beautiful sound filled the 
air. ... It was coming from every thread of the light- 
spun web vibrating around Harry and Voldemort. It 
was a sound Harry recognized, though he had heard 
it only once before in his life: phoenix song. 

It was the sound of hope to Harry . . . the most 
beautiful and welcome thing he had ever heard in his 
life. ... He felt as though the song were inside him 
instead of just around him. ... It was the sound he 
connected with Dumbledore, and it was almost as 
though a friend were speaking in his ear. . . . 

Don’t break the connection. 

I know, Harry told the music, I know I mustn’t ... but 
no sooner had he thought it, than the thing became 
much harder to do. His wand began to vibrate more 
powerfully than ever . . . and now the beam between 

Page | 733 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire -J.K. Rowling 




him and Voldemort changed too ... it was as though 
large beads of light were sliding up and down the 
thread connecting the wands — Harry felt his wand 
give a shudder under his hand as the light beads 
began to slide slowly and steadily his way. . . . The 
direction of the beam’s movement was now toward 
him, from Voldemort, and he felt his wand shudder 
angrily. ... 

As the closest bead of light moved nearer to Harry’s 
wand tip, the wood beneath his fingers grew so hot he 
feared it would burst into flame. The closer that bead 
moved, the harder Harry’s wand vibrated; he was sure 
his wand would not survive contact with it; it felt as 
though it was about to shatter under his fingers — 

He concentrated every last particle of his mind upon 
forcing the bead back toward Voldemort, his ears full 
of phoenix song, his eyes furious, fixed ... and slowly, 
very slowly, the beads quivered to a halt, and then, 
just as slowly, they began to move the other way ... 
and it was Voldemort ’s wand that was vibrating extra- 
hard now ... Voldemort who looked astonished, and 
almost fearful. ... 

One of the beads of light was quivering, inches from 
the tip of Voldemort’s wand. Harry didn’t understand 
why he was doing it, didn’t know what it might 
achieve . . . but he now concentrated as he had never 
done in his life on forcing that bead of light right back 
into Voldemort’s wand ... and slowly ... very slowly ... 
it moved along the golden thread ... it trembled for a 
moment... and then it connected. ... 

At once, Voldemort’s wand began to emit echoing 
screams of pain ... then — Voldemort’s red eyes 
widened with shock — a dense, smoky hand flew out 
of the tip of it and vanished . . . the ghost of the hand 
he had made Wormtail ... more shouts of pain ... and 
Page | 734 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




then something much larger began to blossom from 
Voldemort’s wand tip, a great, grayish something, 
that looked as though it were made of the solidest, 
densest smoke. ... It was a head ... now a chest and 
arms . . . the torso of Cedric Diggory. 

If ever Harry might have released his wand from 
shock, it would have been then, but instinct kept him 
clutching his wand tightly, so that the thread of 
golden light remained unbroken, even though the 
thick gray ghost of Cedric Diggory (was it a ghost? it 
looked so solid) emerged in its entirety from the end of 
Voldemort’s wand, as though it were squeezing itself 
out of a very narrow tunnel . . . and this shade of 
Cedric stood up, and looked up and down the golden 
thread of light, and spoke. 

“Hold on, Harry,” it said. 

Its voice was distant and echoing. Harry looked at 
Voldemort . . . his wide red eyes were still shocked . . . 
he had no more expected this than Harry had . . . and, 
very dimly, Harry heard the frightened yells of the 
Death Eaters, prowling around the edges of the 
golden dome. ... 

More screams of pain from the wand . . . and then 
something else emerged from its tip . . . the dense 
shadow of a second head, quickly followed by arms 
and torso ... an old man Harry had seen only in a 
dream was now pushing himself out of the end of the 
wand just as Cedric had done ... and his ghost, or his 
shadow, or whatever it was, fell next to Cedric’s, and 
surveyed Harry and Voldemort, and the golden web, 
and the connected wands, with mild surprise, leaning 
on his walking stick. . . . 



Page | 735 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“He was a real wizard, then?” the old man said, his 
eyes on Voldemort. “Killed me, that one did. ... You 
fight him, boy. ...” 

But already, yet another head was emerging . . . and 
this head, gray as a smoky statue, was a woman’s. ... 
Harry, both arms shaking now as he fought to keep 
his wand still, saw her drop to the ground and 
straighten up like the others, staring. ... 

The shadow of Bertha Jorkins surveyed the battle 
before her with wide eyes. 

“Don’t let go, now!” she cried, and her voice echoed 
like Cedric’s as though from very far away. “Don’t let 
him get you, Harry — don’t let go!” 

She and the other two shadowy figures began to pace 
around the inner walls of the golden web, while the 
Death Eaters flitted around the outside of it ... and 
Voldemort’s dead victims whispered as they circled 
the duelers, whispered words of encouragement to 
Harry, and hissed words Harry couldn’t hear to 
Voldemort. 

And now another head was emerging from the tip of 
Voldemort’s wand ... and Harry knew when he saw it 
who it would be ... he knew, as though he had 
expected it from the moment when Cedric had 
appeared from the wand . . . knew, because the woman 
was the one he’d thought of more than any other 
tonight. ... 

The smoky shadow of a young woman with long hair 
fell to the ground as Bertha had done, straightened 
up, and looked at him ... and Harry, his arms shaking 
madly now, looked back into the ghostly face of his 
mother. 



Page | 736 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Your father’s coming ...” she said quietly. “Hold on 
for your father ... it will be all right ... hold on. ...” 

And he came . . . first his head, then his body . . . tall 
and untidy-haired like Harry, the smoky, shadowy 
form of James Potter blossomed from the end of 
Voldemort’s wand, fell to the ground, and 
straightened like his wife. He walked close to Harry, 
looking down at him, and he spoke in the same 
distant, echoing voice as the others, but quietly, so 
that Voldemort, his face now livid with fear as his 
victims prowled around him, could not hear. . . . 

“When the connection is broken, we will linger for 
only moments . . . but we will give you time . . . you 
must get to the Portkey, it will return you to Hogwarts 
... do you understand, Harry?” 

“Yes,” Harry gasped, fighting now to keep a hold on 
his wand, which was slipping and sliding beneath his 
fingers. 

“Harry ...” whispered the figure of Cedric, “take my 
body back, will you? Take my body back to my 
parents. ...” 

“I will,” said Harry, his face screwed up with the effort 
of holding the wand. 

“Do it now,” whispered his father’s voice, “be ready to 
run ... do it now. ...” 

“NOW!” Harry yelled; he didn’t think he could have 
held on for another moment anyway — he pulled his 
wand upward with an almighty wrench, and the 
golden thread broke; the cage of light vanished, the 
phoenix song died — but the shadowy figures of 
Voldemort’s victims did not disappear — they were 



Page | 737 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




closing in upon Voldemort, shielding Harry from his 
gaze — 

And Harry ran as he had never run in his life, 
knocking two stunned Death Eaters aside as he 
passed; he zigzagged behind headstones, feeling their 
curses following him, hearing them hit the 
headstones — he was dodging curses and graves, 
pelting toward Cedric’s body, no longer aware of the 
pain in his leg, his whole being concentrated on what 
he had to do — 

“Stun him\” he heard Voldemort scream. 

Ten feet from Cedric, Harry dived behind a marble 
angel to avoid the jets of red light and saw the tip of 
its wing shatter as the spells hit it. Gripping his wand 
more tightly, he dashed out from behind the angel — 

“Impedimental” he bellowed, pointing his wand wildly 
over his shoulder at the Death Eaters running at him. 

From a muffled yell, he thought he had stopped at 
least one of them, but there was no time to stop and 
look; he jumped over the cup and dived as he heard 
more wand blasts behind him; more jets of light flew 
over his head as he fell, stretching out his hand to 
grab Cedric’s arm — 

“Stand aside! I will kill him! He is mine!” shrieked 
Voldemort. 

Harry’s hand had closed on Cedric’s wrist; one 
tombstone stood between him and Voldemort, but 
Cedric was too heavy to carry, and the cup was out of 
reach — 



Page | 738 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Voldemort’s red eyes flamed in the darkness. Harry 
saw his mouth curl into a smile, saw him raise his 
wand. 

“Acciol” Harry yelled, pointing his wand at the 
Triwizard Cup. 

It flew into the air and soared toward him. Harry 
caught it by the handle — 

He heard Voldemort’s scream of fury at the same 
moment that he felt the jerk behind his navel that 
meant the Portkey had worked — it was speeding him 
away in a whirl of wind and color, and Cedric along 
with him. ... They were going back. 



Page | 739 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






VERITASERUM 

Harry felt himself slam flat into the ground; his face 
was pressed into grass; the smell of it filled his 
nostrils. He had closed his eyes while the Portkey 
transported him, and he kept them closed now. He 
did not move. All the breath seemed to have been 
knocked out of him; his head was swimming so badly 
he felt as though the ground beneath him were 
swaying like the deck of a ship. To hold himself 
steady, he tightened his hold on the two things he 
was still clutching: the smooth, cold handle of the Tri- 
wizard Cup and Cedric’s body. He felt as though he 
would slide away into the blackness gathering at the 
edges of his brain if he let go of either of them. Shock 
and exhaustion kept him on the ground, breathing in 
the smell of the grass, waiting ... waiting for someone 
to do something . . . something to happen . . . and all 
the while, his scar burned dully on his forehead. ... 

A torrent of sound deafened and confused him; there 
were voices everywhere, footsteps, screams. ... He 
remained where he was, his face screwed up against 



Page | 740 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



the noise, as though it were a nightmare that would 
pass. ... 

Then a pair of hands seized him roughly and turned 
him over. 

“Harry! HarryV’ 

He opened his eyes. 

He was looking up at the starry sky, and Albus 
Dumbledore was crouched over him. The dark 
shadows of a crowd of people pressed in around 
them, pushing nearer; Harry felt the ground beneath 
his head reverberating with their footsteps. 

He had come back to the edge of the maze. He could 
see the stands rising above him, the shapes of people 
moving in them, the stars above. 

Harry let go of the cup, but he clutched Cedric to him 
even more tightly. He raised his free hand and seized 
Dumbledore ’s wrist, while Dumbledore ’s face swam in 
and out of focus. 

“He’s back,” Harry whispered. “He’s back. Voldemort.” 

“What’s going on? What’s happened?” 

The face of Cornelius Fudge appeared upside down 
over Harry; it looked white, appalled. 

“My God — Diggory!” it whispered. “Dumbledore — 
he’s dead!” 

The words were repeated, the shadowy figures 
pressing in on them gasped it to those around them 
. . . and then others shouted it — screeched it — into 



Page | 741 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




the night — “He’s dead!” “He’s dead!” “Cedric Diggory! 
Dead).” 



“Harry, let go of him,” he heard Fudge’s voice say, and 
he felt fingers trying to pry him from Cedric’s limp 
body, but Harry wouldn’t let him go. Then 
Dumbledore’s face, which was still blurred and 
misted, came closer. 

“Harry, you can’t help him now. It’s over. Let go.” 

“He wanted me to bring him back,” Harry muttered — 
it seemed important to explain this. “He wanted me to 
bring him back to his parents. ...” 

“That’s right, Harry ... just let go now. ...” 

Dumbledore bent down, and with extraordinary 
strength for a man so old and thin, raised Harry from 
the ground and set him on his feet. Harry swayed. His 
head was pounding. His injured leg would no longer 
support his weight. The crowd around them jostled, 
fighting to get closer, pressing darkly in on him — 
“What’s happened?” “What’s wrong with him?” 

“Dig gory’s dead\” 

“He’ll need to go to the hospital wing!” Fudge was 
saying loudly. “He’s ill, he’s injured — Dumbledore, 
Diggory’s parents, they’re here, they’re in the stands. 



“I’ll take Harry, Dumbledore, I’ll take him — ” 

“No, I would prefer — ” 

“Dumbledore, Amos Diggory’s running ... he’s coming 
over. ... Don’t you think you should tell him — before 
he sees — ?” 

Page | 742 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Harry, stay here — ” 



Girls were screaming, sobbing hysterically. . . . The 
scene flickered oddly before Harry’s eyes. ... 

“It’s all right, son, I’ve got you ... come on ... hospital 
wing ...” 

“Dumbledore said stay,” said Harry thickly, the 
pounding in his scar making him feel as though he 
was about to throw up; his vision was blurring worse 
than ever. 

“You need to lie down. ... Come on now. ...” 

Someone larger and stronger than he was was half 
pulling, half carrying him through the frightened 
crowd. Harry heard people gasping, screaming, and 
shouting as the man supporting him pushed a path 
through them, taking him back to the castle. Across 
the lawn, past the lake and the Durmstrang ship, 
Harry heard nothing but the heavy breathing of the 
man helping him walk. 

“What happened, Harry?” the man asked at last as he 
lifted Harry up the stone steps. Clunk. Clunk. Clunk. 

It was Mad-Eye Moody. 

“Cup was a Portkey,” said Harry as they crossed the 
entrance hall. “Took me and Cedric to a graveyard ... 
and Voldemort was there ... Lord Voldemort ...” 

Clunk. Clunk. Clunk. Up the marble stairs ... 

“The Dark Lord was there? What happened then?” 

“Killed Cedric ... they killed Cedric. ...” 

“And then?” 

Page | 743 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Clunk. Clunk. Clunk. Along the corridor . . . 

“Made a potion ... got his body back. ...” 

“The Dark Lord got his body back? He’s returned?” 
“And the Death Eaters came ... and then we dueled. 



“You dueled with the Dark Lord?” 

“Got away . . . my wand . . . did something funny. ... I 
saw my mum and dad ... they came out of his wand. 



“In here, Harry ... in here, and sit down. ... You’ll be 
all right now ... drink this. ...” 

Harry heard a key scrape in a lock and felt a cup 
being pushed into his hands. 

“Drink it ... you’ll feel better ... come on, now, Harry, I 
need to know exactly what happened. ...” 

Moody helped tip the stuff down Harry’s throat; he 
coughed, a peppery taste burning his throat. Moody’s 
office came into sharper focus, and so did Moody 
himself. ... He looked as white as Fudge had looked, 
and both eyes were fixed unblinkingly upon Harry’s 
face. 

“Voldemort’s back, Harry? You’re sure he’s back? How 
did he do it?” 

“He took stuff from his father’s grave, and from 
Wormtail, and me,” said Harry. His head felt clearer; 
his scar wasn’t hurting so badly; he could now see 
Moody’s face distinctly, even though the office was 



Page | 744 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




dark. He could still hear screaming and shouting 
from the distant Quidditch field. 



“What did the Dark Lord take from you?” said Moody. 

“Blood,” said Harry, raising his arm. His sleeve was 
ripped where Wormtail’s dagger had torn it. 

Moody let out his breath in a long, low hiss. 

“And the Death Eaters? They returned?” 

“Yes,” said Harry. “Loads of them ...” 

“How did he treat them?” Moody asked quietly. “Did 
he forgive them?” 

But Harry had suddenly remembered. He should have 
told Dumbledore, he should have said it straightaway 



“There’s a Death Eater at Hogwarts! There’s a Death 
Eater here — they put my name in the Goblet of Fire, 
they made sure I got through to the end — ” 

Harry tried to get up, but Moody pushed him back 
down. 

“I know who the Death Eater is,” he said quietly. 

“Karkaroff?” said Harry wildly. “Where is he? Have 
you got him? Is he locked up?” 

“Karkaroff?” said Moody with an odd laugh. 

“Karkaroff fled tonight, when he felt the Dark Mark 
burn upon his arm. He betrayed too many faithful 
supporters of the Dark Lord to wish to meet them . . . 
but I doubt he will get far. The Dark Lord has ways of 
tracking his enemies.” 

Page | 745 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Karkaroff’s gone? He ran away? But then — he didn’t 
put my name in the goblet?” 



“No,” said Moody slowly. “No, he didn’t. It was I who 
did that.” 

Harry heard, but didn’t believe. 

“No, you didn’t,” he said. “You didn’t do that ... you 
can’t have done ...” 

“I assure you I did,” said Moody, and his magical eye 
swung around and fixed upon the door, and Harry 
knew he was making sure that there was no one 
outside it. At the same time, Moody drew out his 
wand and pointed it at Harry. 

“He forgave them, then?” he said. “The Death Eaters 
who went free? The ones who escaped Azkaban?” 

“What?” said Harry. 

He was looking at the wand Moody was pointing at 
him. This was a bad joke, it had to be. 

“I asked you,” said Moody quietly, “whether he forgave 
the scum who never even went to look for him. Those 
treacherous cowards who wouldn’t even brave 
Azkaban for him. The faithless, worthless bits of filth 
who were brave enough to cavort in masks at the 
Quidditch World Cup, but fled at the sight of the Dark 
Mark when I fired it into the sky.” 

“ You fired . . . What are you talking about ... ?” 

“I told you, Harry ... I told you. If there’s one thing I 
hate more than any other, it’s a Death Eater who 
walked free. They turned their backs on my master 
when he needed them most. I expected him to punish 

Page | 746 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




them. I expected him to torture them. Tell me he hurt 
them, Harry. ...” Moody’s face was suddenly lit with 
an insane smile. “Tell me he told them that I, I alone 
remained faithful . . . prepared to risk everything to 
deliver to him the one thing he wanted above all ... 
you.” 

“You didn’t ... it — it can’t be you. ...” 

“Who put your name in the Goblet of Fire, under the 
name of a different school? I did. Who frightened off 
every person I thought might try to hurt you or 
prevent you from winning the tournament? I did. Who 
nudged Hagrid into showing you the dragons? I did. 
Who helped you see the only way you could beat the 
dragon? I did.” 

Moody’s magical eye had now left the door. It was 
fixed upon Harry. His lopsided mouth leered more 
widely than ever. 

“It hasn’t been easy, Harry, guiding you through these 
tasks without arousing suspicion. I have had to use 
every ounce of cunning I possess, so that my hand 
would not be detectable in your success. Dumbledore 
would have been very suspicious if you had managed 
everything too easily. As long as you got into that 
maze, preferably with a decent head start — then, I 
knew, I would have a chance of getting rid of the 
other champions and leaving your way clear. But I 
also had to contend with your stupidity. The second 
task . . . that was when I was most afraid we would 
fail. I was keeping watch on you, Potter. I knew you 
hadn’t worked out the egg’s clue, so I had to give you 
another hint — ” 

“You didn’t,” Harry said hoarsely. “Cedric gave me the 
clue — ” 



Page | 747 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Who told Cedric to open it underwater? I did. I 
trusted that he would pass the information on to you. 
Decent people are so easy to manipulate, Potter. I was 
sure Cedric would want to repay you for telling him 
about the dragons, and so he did. But even then, 
Potter, even then you seemed likely to fail. I was 
watching all the time ... all those hours in the library. 
Didn’t you realize that the book you needed was in 
your dormitory all along? I planted it there early on, I 
gave it to the Longbottom boy, don’t you remember? 
Magical Water Plants of the Mediterranean. It would 
have told you all you needed to know about gillyweed. 

I expected you to ask everyone and anyone you could 
for help. Longbottom would have told you in an 
instant. But you did not ... you did not. ... You have a 
streak of pride and independence that might have 
ruined all. 

“So what could I do? Feed you information from 
another innocent source. You told me at the Yule Ball 
a house-elf called Dobby had given you a Christmas 
present. I called the elf to the staffroom to collect 
some robes for cleaning. I staged a loud conversation 
with Professor McGonagall about the hostages who 
had been taken, and whether Potter would think to 
use gillyweed. And your little elf friend ran straight to 
Snape’s office and then hurried to find you. ...” 

Moody’s wand was still pointing directly at Harry’s 
heart. Over his shoulder, foggy shapes were moving in 
the Foe-Glass on the wall. 

“You were so long in that lake, Potter, I thought you 
had drowned. But luckily, Dumbledore took your 
idiocy for nobility, and marked you high for it. I 
breathed again. 

“You had an easier time of it than you should have in 
that maze tonight, of course,” said Moody. “I was 

Page | 748 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




patrolling around it, able to see through the outer 
hedges, able to curse many obstacles out of your way. 
I Stunned Fleur Delacour as she passed. I put the 
Imperius Curse on Krum, so that he would finish 
Diggory and leave your path to the cup clear.” 

Harry stared at Moody. He just didn’t see how this 
could be. ... Dumbledore’s friend, the famous Auror 
. . . the one who had caught so many Death Eaters . . . 

It made no sense ... no sense at all. ... 

The foggy shapes in the Foe-Glass were sharpening, 
had become more distinct. Harry could see the 
outlines of three people over Moody’s shoulder, 
moving closer and closer. But Moody wasn’t watching 
them. His magical eye was upon Harry. 

“The Dark Lord didn’t manage to kill you, Potter, and 
he so wanted to,” whispered Moody. “Imagine how he 
will reward me when he finds I have done it for him. I 
gave you to him — the thing he needed above all to 
regenerate — and then I killed you for him. I will be 
honored beyond all other Death Eaters. I will be his 
dearest, his closest supporter ... closer than a son. ...” 

Moody’s normal eye was bulging, the magical eye 
fixed upon Harry. The door was barred, and Harry 
knew he would never reach his own wand in time. ... 

“The Dark Lord and I,” said Moody, and he looked 
completely insane now, towering over Harry, leering 
down at him, “have much in common. Both of us, for 
instance, had very disappointing fathers ... very 
disappointing indeed. Both of us suffered the 
indignity, Harry, of being named after those fathers. 
And both of us had the pleasure . . . the very great 
pleasure ... of killing our fathers to ensure the 
continued rise of the Dark Order!” 



Page | 749 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You’re mad,” Harry said — he couldn’t stop himself 
— “you’re mad!” 



“Mad, am I?” said Moody, his voice rising 
uncontrollably. “We’ll see! We’ll see who’s mad, now 
that the Dark Lord has returned, with me at his side! 
He is back, Harry Potter, you did not conquer him — 
and now — I conquer you!” 

Moody raised his wand, he opened his mouth; Harry 
plunged his own hand into his robes — 

“Stupefy\” There was a blinding flash of red light, and 
with a great splintering and crashing, the door of 
Moody’s office was blasted apart — 

Moody was thrown backward onto the office floor. 
Harry, still staring at the place where Moody’s face 
had been, saw Albus Dumbledore, Professor Snape, 
and Professor McGonagall looking back at him out of 
the Foe-Glass. He looked around and saw the three of 
them standing in the doorway, Dumbledore in front, 
his wand outstretched. 

At that moment, Harry fully understood for the first 
time why people said Dumbledore was the only wizard 
Voldemort had ever feared. The look upon 
Dumbledore ’s face as he stared down at the 
unconscious form of Mad-Eye Moody was more 
terrible than Harry could have ever imagined. There 
was no benign smile upon Dumbledore ’s face, no 
twinkle in the eyes behind the spectacles. There was 
cold fury in every line of the ancient face; a sense of 
power radiated from Dumbledore as though he were 
giving off burning heat. 

He stepped into the office, placed a foot underneath 
Moody’s unconscious body, and kicked him over onto 
his back, so that his face was visible. Snape followed 

Page | 750 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




him, looking into the Foe-Glass, where his own face 
was still visible, glaring into the room. Professor 
McGonagall went straight to Harry. 

“Come along, Potter,” she whispered. The thin line of 
her mouth was twitching as though she was about to 
cry. “Come along ... hospital wing ...” 

“No,” said Dumbledore sharply. 

“Dumbledore, he ought to — look at him — he’s been 
through enough tonight — ” 

“He will stay, Minerva, because he needs to 
understand,” said Dumbledore curtly. “Understanding 
is the first step to acceptance, and only with 
acceptance can there be recovery. He needs to know 
who has put him through the ordeal he has suffered 
tonight, and why.” 

“Moody,” Harry said. He was still in a state of 
complete disbelief. “How can it have been Moody?” 

“This is not Alastor Moody,” said Dumbledore quietly. 
“You have never known Alastor Moody. The real 
Moody would not have removed you from my sight 
after what happened tonight. The moment he took 
you, I knew — and I followed.” 

Dumbledore bent down over Moody’s limp form and 
put a hand inside his robes. He pulled out Moody’s 
hip flask and a set of keys on a ring. Then he turned 
to Professors McGonagall and Snape. 

“Severus, please fetch me the strongest Truth Potion 
you possess, and then go down to the kitchens and 
bring up the house-elf called Winky. Minerva, kindly 
go down to Hagrid’s house, where you will find a large 
black dog sitting in the pumpkin patch. Take the dog 
Page | 751 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




up to my office, tell him I will be with him shortly, 
then come back here.” 

If either Snape or McGonagall found these 
instructions peculiar, they hid their confusion. Both 
turned at once and left the office. Dumbledore walked 
over to the trunk with seven locks, fitted the first key 
in the lock, and opened it. It contained a mass of 
spell-books. Dumbledore closed the trunk, placed a 
second key in the second lock, and opened the trunk 
again. The spellbooks had vanished; this time it 
contained an assortment of broken Sneako-scopes, 
some parchment and quills, and what looked like a 
silvery Invisibility Cloak. Harry watched, astounded, 
as Dumbledore placed the third, fourth, fifth, and 
sixth keys in their respective locks, reopening the 
trunk, and each time revealing different contents. 
Then he placed the seventh key in the lock, threw 
open the lid, and Harry let out a cry of amazement. 

He was looking down into a kind of pit, an 
underground room, and lying on the floor some ten 
feet below, apparently fast asleep, thin and starved in 
appearance, was the real Mad-Eye Moody. His 
wooden leg was gone, the socket that should have 
held the magical eye looked empty beneath its lid, 
and chunks of his grizzled hair were missing. Harry 
stared, thunderstruck, between the sleeping Moody in 
the trunk and the unconscious Moody lying on the 
floor of the office. 

Dumbledore climbed into the trunk, lowered himself, 
and fell lightly onto the floor beside the sleeping 
Moody. He bent over him. 

“Stunned — controlled by the Imperius Curse — very 
weak,” he said. “Of course, they would have needed to 
keep him alive. Harry, throw down the imposter’s 



Page | 752 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




cloak — he’s freezing. Madam Pomfrey will need to see 
him, but he seems in no immediate danger.” 

Harry did as he was told; Dumbledore covered Moody 
in the cloak, tucked it around him, and clambered 
out of the trunk again. Then he picked up the hip 
flask that stood upon the desk, unscrewed it, and 
turned it over. A thick glutinous liquid splattered onto 
the office floor. 

“Polyjuice Potion, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “You see 
the simplicity of it, and the brilliance. For Moody 
never does drink except from his hip flask, he’s well 
known for it. The imposter needed, of course, to keep 
the real Moody close by, so that he could continue 
making the potion. You see his hair ...” Dumbledore 
looked down on the Moody in the trunk. “The 
imposter has been cutting it off all year, see where it 
is uneven? But I think, in the excitement of tonight, 
our fake Moody might have forgotten to take it as 
frequently as he should have done ... on the hour . . . 
every hour. ... We shall see.” 

Dumbledore pulled out the chair at the desk and sat 
down upon it, his eyes fixed upon the unconscious 
Moody on the floor. Harry stared at him too. Minutes 
passed in silence. ... 

Then, before Harry’s very eyes, the face of the man on 
the floor began to change. The scars were 
disappearing, the skin was becoming smooth; the 
mangled nose became whole and started to shrink. 
The long mane of grizzled gray hair was withdrawing 
into the scalp and turning the color of straw. 
Suddenly, with a loud clunk, the wooden leg fell away 
as a normal leg regrew in its place; next moment, the 
magical eyeball had popped out of the man’s face as a 
real eye replaced it; it rolled away across the floor and 
continued to swivel in every direction. 

Page | 753 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Harry saw a man lying before him, pale-skinned, 
slightly freckled, with a mop of fair hair. He knew who 
he was. He had seen him in Dumbledore’s Pensieve, 
had watched him being led away from court by the 
dementors, trying to convince Mr. Crouch that he was 
innocent . . . but he was lined around the eyes now 
and looked much older. . . . 

There were hurried footsteps outside in the corridor. 
Snape had returned with Winky at his heels. 

Professor McGonagall was right behind them. 

“Crouch!” Snape said, stopping dead in the doorway. 
“Barty Crouch!” 

“Good heavens,” said Professor McGonagall, stopping 
dead and staring down at the man on the floor. 

Filthy, disheveled, Winky peered around Snape’s legs. 
Her mouth opened wide and she let out a piercing 
shriek. 

“Master Barty, Master Barty, what is you doing here?” 

She flung herself forward onto the young man’s chest. 

“You is killed him! You is killed him! You is killed 
Master’s son!” 

“He is simply Stunned, Winky,” said Dumbledore. 
“Step aside, please. Severus, you have the potion?” 

Snape handed Dumbledore a small glass bottle of 
completely clear liquid: the Veritaserum with which 
he had threatened Harry in class. Dumbledore got up, 
bent over the man on the floor, and pulled him into a 
sitting position against the wall beneath the Foe- 
Glass, in which the reflections of Dumbledore, Snape, 
and McGonagall were still glaring down upon them 
Page | 754 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




all. Winky remained on her knees, trembling, her 
hands over her face. Dumbledore forced the man’s 
mouth open and poured three drops inside it. Then 
he pointed his wand at the man’s chest and said, 
“Rennervate.” 

Crouch’s son opened his eyes. His face was slack, his 
gaze unfocused. Dumbledore knelt before him, so that 
their faces were level. 

“Can you hear me?” Dumbledore asked quietly. 

The man’s eyelids flickered. 

“Yes,” he muttered. 

“I would like you to tell us,” said Dumbledore softly, 
“how you came to be here. How did you escape from 
Azkaban?” 

Crouch took a deep, shuddering breath, then began 
to speak in a flat, expressionless voice. 

“My mother saved me. She knew she was dying. She 
persuaded my father to rescue me as a last favor to 
her. He loved her as he had never loved me. He 
agreed. They came to visit me. They gave me a draft of 
Polyjuice Potion containing one of my mother’s hairs. 
She took a draft of Polyjuice Potion containing one of 
my hairs. We took on each other’s appearance.” 

Winky was shaking her head, trembling. 

“Say no more, Master Barty, say no more, you is 
getting your father into trouble!” 

But Crouch took another deep breath and continued 
in the same flat voice. 



Page | 755 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“The dementors are blind. They sensed one healthy, 
one dying person entering Azkaban. They sensed one 
healthy, one dying person leaving it. My father 
smuggled me out, disguised as my mother, in case 
any prisoners were watching through their doors. 

“My mother died a short while afterward in Azkaban. 
She was careful to drink Polyjuice Potion until the 
end. She was buried under my name and bearing my 
appearance. Everyone believed her to be me.” 

The man’s eyelids flickered. 

“And what did your father do with you, when he had 
got you home?” said Dumbledore quietly. 

“Staged my mother’s death. A quiet, private funeral. 
That grave is empty. The house-elf nursed me back to 
health. Then I had to be concealed. I had to be 
controlled. My father had to use a number of spells to 
subdue me. When I had recovered my strength, I 
thought only of finding my master ... of returning to 
his service.” 

“How did your father subdue you?” said Dumbledore. 

“The Imperius Curse,” Crouch said. “I was under my 
father’s control. I was forced to wear an Invisibility 
Cloak day and night. I was always with the house-elf. 
She was my keeper and caretaker. She pitied me. She 
persuaded my father to give me occasional treats. 
Rewards for my good behavior.” 

“Master Barty, Master Barty,” sobbed Winky through 
her hands. “You isn’t ought to tell them, we is getting 
in trouble. ...” 



Page | 756 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Did anybody ever discover that you were still alive?” 
said Dumbledore softly. “Did anyone know except 
your father and the house-elf?” 

“Yes,” said Crouch, his eyelids flickering again. “A 
witch in my father’s office. Bertha Jorkins. She came 
to the house with papers for my father’s signature. He 
was not at home. Winky showed her inside and 
returned to the kitchen, to me. But Bertha Jorkins 
heard Winky talking to me. She came to investigate. 
She heard enough to guess who was hiding under the 
Invisibility Cloak. My father arrived home. She 
confronted him. He put a very powerful Memory 
Charm on her to make her forget what she’d found 
out. Too powerful. He said it damaged her memory 
permanently.” 

“Why is she coming to nose into my master’s private 
business?” sobbed Winky. “Why isn’t she leaving us 
be?” 

“Tell me about the Quidditch World Cup,” said 
Dumbledore. 

“Winky talked my father into it,” said Crouch, still in 
the same monotonous voice. “She spent months 
persuading him. I had not left the house for years. I 
had loved Quidditch. Let him go, she said. He will be 
in his Invisibility Cloak. He can watch. Let him smell 
fresh air for once. She said my mother would have 
wanted it. She told my father that my mother had 
died to give me freedom. She had not saved me for a 
life of imprisonment. He agreed in the end. 

“It was carefully planned. My father led me and Winky 
up to the Top Box early in the day. Winky was to say 
that she was saving a seat for my father. I was to sit 
there, invisible. When everyone had left the box, we 



Page | 757 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




would emerge. Winky would appear to be alone. 
Nobody would ever know. 

“But Winky didn’t know that I was growing stronger. I 
was starting to fight my father’s Imperius Curse. 

There were times when I was almost myself again. 
There were brief periods when I seemed outside his 
control. It happened, there, in the Top Box. It was like 
waking from a deep sleep. I found myself out in 
public, in the middle of the match, and I saw, in front 
of me, a wand sticking out of a boy’s pocket. I had not 
been allowed a wand since before Azkaban. I stole it. 
Winky didn’t know. Winky is frightened of heights. 

She had her face hidden.” 

“Master Barty, you bad boy!” whispered Winky, tears 
trickling between her fingers. 

“So you took the wand,” said Dumbledore, “and what 
did you do with it?” 

“We went back to the tent,” said Crouch. “Then we 
heard them. We heard the Death Eaters. The ones 
who had never been to Azkaban. The ones who had 
never suffered for my master. They had turned their 
backs on him. They were not enslaved, as I was. They 
were free to seek him, but they did not. They were 
merely making sport of Muggles. The sound of their 
voices awoke me. My mind was clearer than it had 
been in years. I was angry. I had the wand. I wanted 
to attack them for their disloyalty to my master. My 
father had left the tent; he had gone to free the 
Muggles. Winky was afraid to see me so angry. She 
used her own brand of magic to bind me to her. She 
pulled me from the tent, pulled me into the forest, 
away from the Death Eaters. I tried to hold her back. I 
wanted to return to the campsite. I wanted to show 
those Death Eaters what loyalty to the Dark Lord 



Page | 758 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




meant, and to punish them for their lack of it. I used 
the stolen wand to cast the Dark Mark into the sky. 

“Ministry wizards arrived. They shot Stunning Spells 
everywhere. One of the spells came through the trees 
where Winky and I stood. The bond connecting us 
was broken. We were both Stunned. 

“When Winky was discovered, my father knew I must 
be nearby. He searched the bushes where she had 
been found and felt me lying there. He waited until 
the other Ministry members had left the forest. He put 
me back under the Imperius Curse and took me 
home. He dismissed Winky. She had failed him. She 
had let me acquire a wand. She had almost let me 
escape.” 

Winky let out a wail of despair. 

“Now it was just Father and I, alone in the house. And 
then ... and then ...” Crouch’s head rolled on his 
neck, and an insane grin spread across his face. “My 
master came for me. 

“He arrived at our house late one night in the arms of 
his servant Wormtail. My master had found out that I 
was still alive. He had captured Bertha Jorkins in 
Albania. He had tortured her. She told him a great 
deal. She told him about the Triwizard Tournament. 
She told him the old Auror, Moody, was going to teach 
at Hogwarts. He tortured her until he broke through 
the Memory Charm my father had placed upon her. 
She told him I had escaped from Azkaban. She told 
him my father kept me imprisoned to prevent me from 
seeking my master. And so my master knew that I 
was still his faithful servant — perhaps the most 
faithful of all. My master conceived a plan, based 
upon the information Bertha had given him. He 



Page | 759 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




needed me. He arrived at our house near midnight. 

My father answered the door.” 

The smile spread wider over Crouch’s face, as though 
recalling the sweetest memory of his life. Winky’s 
petrified brown eyes were visible through her fingers. 
She seemed too appalled to speak. 

“It was very quick. My father was placed under the 
Imperius Curse by my master. Now my father was the 
one imprisoned, controlled. My master forced him to 
go about his business as usual, to act as though 
nothing was wrong. And I was released. I awoke. I 
was myself again, alive as I hadn’t been in years.” 

“And what did Lord Voldemort ask you to do?” said 
Dumbledore. 

“He asked me whether I was ready to risk everything 
for him. I was ready. It was my dream, my greatest 
ambition, to serve him, to prove myself to him. He 
told me he needed to place a faithful servant at 
Hogwarts. A servant who would guide Harry Potter 
through the Triwizard Tournament without appearing 
to do so. A servant who would watch over Harry 
Potter. Ensure he reached the Triwizard Cup. Turn 
the cup into a Portkey, which would take the first 
person to touch it to my master. But first — ” 

“You needed Alastor Moody,” said Dumbledore. His 
blue eyes were blazing, though his voice remained 
calm. 

“Wormtail and I did it. We had prepared the Polyjuice 
Potion beforehand. We journeyed to his house. Moody 
put up a struggle. There was a commotion. We 
managed to subdue him just in time. Forced him into 
a compartment of his own magical trunk. Took some 
of his hair and added it to the potion. I drank it; I 
Page | 760 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




became Moody’s double. I took his leg and his eye. I 
was ready to face Arthur Weasley when he arrived to 
sort out the Muggles who had heard a disturbance. I 
made the dustbins move around the yard. I told 
Arthur Weasley I had heard intruders in my yard, 
who had set off the dustbins. Then I packed up 
Moody’s clothes and Dark detectors, put them in the 
trunk with Moody, and set off for Hogwarts. I kept 
him alive, under the Imperius Curse. I wanted to be 
able to question him. To find out about his past, learn 
his habits, so that I could fool even Dumbledore. I 
also needed his hair to make the Polyjuice Potion. The 
other ingredients were easy. I stole boom-slang skin 
from the dungeons. When the Potions master found 
me in his office, I said I was under orders to search 
it.” 

“And what became of Wormtail after you attacked 
Moody?” said Dumbledore. 

“Wormtail returned to care for my master, in my 
father’s house, and to keep watch over my father.” 

“But your father escaped,” said Dumbledore. 

“Yes. After a while he began to fight the Imperius 
Curse just as I had done. There were periods when he 
knew what was happening. My master decided it was 
no longer safe for my father to leave the house. He 
forced him to send letters to the Ministry instead. He 
made him write and say he was ill. But Wormtail 
neglected his duty. He was not watchful enough. My 
father escaped. My master guessed that he was 
heading for Hogwarts. My father was going to tell 
Dumbledore everything, to confess. He was going to 
admit that he had smuggled me from Azkaban. 

“My master sent me word of my father’s escape. He 
told me to stop him at all costs. So I waited and 

Page | 761 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




watched. I used the map I had taken from Harry 
Potter. The map that had almost mined everything.” 

“Map?” said Dumbledore quickly. “What map is this?” 

“Potter’s map of Hogwarts. Potter saw me on it. Potter 
saw me stealing more ingredients for the Polyjuice 
Potion from Snape’s office one night. He thought I was 
my father. We have the same first name. I took the 
map from Potter that night. I told him my father 
hated Dark wizards. Potter believed my father was 
after Snape. 

“For a week I waited for my father to arrive at 
Hogwarts. At last, one evening, the map showed my 
father entering the grounds. I pulled on my Invisibility 
Cloak and went down to meet him. He was walking 
around the edge of the forest. Then Potter came, and 
Krum. I waited. I could not hurt Potter; my master 
needed him. Potter ran to get Dumbledore. I Stunned 
Krum. I killed my father.” 

“iVoooo!” wailed Winky. “Master Barty, Master Barty, 
what is you saying?” 

“You killed your father,” Dumbledore said, in the 
same soft voice. “What did you do with the body?” 

“Carried it into the forest. Covered it with the 
Invisibility Cloak. I had the map with me. I watched 
Potter run into the castle. He met Snape. Dumbledore 
joined them. I watched Potter bringing Dumbledore 
out of the castle. I walked back out of the forest, 
doubled around behind them, went to meet them. I 
told Dumbledore Snape had told me where to come. 

“Dumbledore told me to go and look for my father. I 
went back to my father’s body. Watched the map. 
When everyone was gone, I Transfigured my father’s 

Page | 762 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




body. He became a bone ... I buried it, while wearing 
the Invisibility Cloak, in the freshly dug earth in front 
of Hagrid’s cabin.” 

There was complete silence now, except for Winky’s 
continued sobs. Then Dumbledore said, “And tonight 



“I offered to carry the Triwizard Cup into the maze 
before dinner,” whispered Barty Crouch. “Turned it 
into a Portkey. My master’s plan worked. He is 
returned to power and I will be honored by him 
beyond the dreams of wizards.” 

The insane smile lit his features once more, and his 
head drooped onto his shoulder as Winky wailed and 
sobbed at his side. 



Page | 763 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE PARTING OF THE WAYS 

Dumbledore stood up. He stared down at Barty 
Crouch for a moment with disgust on his face. Then 
he raised his wand once more and ropes flew out of it, 
ropes that twisted themselves around Barty Crouch, 
binding him tightly. He turned to Professor 
McGonagall. 

“Minerva, could I ask you to stand guard here while I 
take Harry upstairs?” 

“Of course,” said Professor McGonagall. She looked 
slightly nauseous, as though she had just watched 
someone being sick. However, when she drew out her 
wand and pointed it at Barty Crouch, her hand was 
quite steady. 

“Severus” — Dumbledore turned to Snape — “please 
tell Madam Pomfrey to come down here; we need to 
get Alastor Moody into the hospital wing. Then go 
down into the grounds, find Cornelius Fudge, and 
bring him up to this office. He will undoubtedly want 



Page | 764 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



to question Crouch himself. Tell him I will be in the 
hospital wing in half an hour’s time if he needs me.” 

Snape nodded silently and swept out of the room. 

“Harry?” Dumbledore said gently. 

Harry got up and swayed again; the pain in his leg, 
which he had not noticed all the time he had been 
listening to Crouch, now returned in full measure. He 
also realized that he was shaking. Dumbledore 
gripped his arm and helped him out into the dark 
corridor. 

“I want you to come up to my office first, Harry,” he 
said quietly as they headed up the passageway. 

“Sirius is waiting for us there.” 

Harry nodded. A kind of numbness and a sense of 
complete unreality were upon him, but he did not 
care; he was even glad of it. He didn’t want to have to 
think about anything that had happened since he had 
first touched the Triwizard Cup. He didn’t want to 
have to examine the memories, fresh and sharp as 
photographs, which kept flashing across his mind. 
Mad-Eye Moody, inside the trunk. Wormtail, slumped 
on the ground, cradling his stump of an arm. 
Voldemort, rising from the steaming cauldron. Cedric 
. . . dead . . . Cedric, asking to be returned to his 
parents. ... 

“Professor,” Harry mumbled, “where are Mr. and Mrs. 
Diggory?” 

“They are with Professor Sprout,” said Dumbledore. 
His voice, which had been so calm throughout the 
interrogation of Barty Crouch, shook very slightly for 
the first time. “She was Head of Cedric’s house, and 
knew him best.” 

Page | 765 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




They had reached the stone gargoyle. Dumbledore 
gave the password, it sprang aside, and he and Harry 
went up the moving spiral staircase to the oak door. 
Dumbledore pushed it open. Sirius was standing 
there. His face was white and gaunt as it had been 
when he had escaped Azkaban. In one swift moment, 
he had crossed the room. 

“Harry, are you all right? I knew it — I knew 
something like this — what happened?” 

His hands shook as he helped Harry into a chair in 
front of the desk. 

“What happened?” he asked more urgently. 

Dumbledore began to tell Sirius everything Barty 
Crouch had said. Harry was only half listening. So 
tired every bone in his body was aching, he wanted 
nothing more than to sit here, undisturbed, for hours 
and hours, until he fell asleep and didn’t have to 
think or feel anymore. 

There was a soft rush of wings. Fawkes the phoenix 
had left his perch, flown across the office, and landed 
on Harry’s knee. 

“ ’Lo, Fawkes,” said Harry quietly. He stroked the 
phoenix’s beautiful scarlet-and-gold plumage. Fawkes 
blinked peacefully up at him. There was something 
comforting about his warm weight. 

Dumbledore stopped talking. He sat down opposite 
Harry, behind his desk. He was looking at Harry, who 
avoided his eyes. Dumbledore was going to question 
him. He was going to make Harry relive everything. 

“I need to know what happened after you touched the 
Portkey in the maze, Harry,” said Dumbledore. 

Page | 766 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“We can leave that till morning, can’t we, 
Dumbledore?” said Sirius harshly. He had put a hand 
on Harry’s shoulder. “Let him have a sleep. Let him 
rest.” 

Harry felt a rush of gratitude toward Sirius, but 
Dumbledore took no notice of Sirius’s words. He 
leaned forward toward Harry. Very unwillingly, Harry 
raised his head and looked into those blue eyes. 

“If I thought I could help you,” Dumbledore said 
gently, “by putting you into an enchanted sleep and 
allowing you to postpone the moment when you 
would have to think about what has happened 
tonight, I would do it. But I know better. Numbing the 
pain for a while will make it worse when you finally 
feel it. You have shown bravery beyond anything I 
could have expected of you. I ask you to demonstrate 
your courage one more time. I ask you to tell us what 
happened.” 

The phoenix let out one soft, quavering note. It 
shivered in the air, and Harry felt as though a drop of 
hot liquid had slipped down his throat into his 
stomach, warming him, and strengthening him. 

He took a deep breath and began to tell them. As he 
spoke, visions of everything that had passed that 
night seemed to rise before his eyes; he saw the 
sparkling surface of the potion that had revived 
Voldemort; he saw the Death Eaters Apparating 
between the graves around them; he saw Cedric’s 
body, lying on the ground beside the cup. 

Once or twice, Sirius made a noise as though about to 
say something, his hand still tight on Harry’s 
shoulder, but Dumbledore raised his hand to stop 
him, and Harry was glad of this, because it was easier 
to keep going now he had started. It was even a relief; 
Page | 767 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




he felt almost as though something poisonous were 
being extracted from him. It was costing him every bit 
of determination he had to keep talking, yet he sensed 
that once he had finished, he would feel better. 

When Harry told of Wormtail piercing his arm with 
the dagger, however, Sirius let out a vehement 
exclamation and Dumbledore stood up so quickly that 
Harry started. Dumbledore walked around the desk 
and told Harry to stretch out his arm. Harry showed 
them both the place where his robes were torn and 
the cut beneath them. 

“He said my blood would make him stronger than if 
he’d used someone else’s,” Harry told Dumbledore. 

“He said the protection my — my mother left in me — 
he’d have it too. And he was right — he could touch 
me without hurting himself, he touched my face.” 

For a fleeting instant, Harry thought he saw a gleam 
of something like triumph in Dumbledore ’s eyes. But 
next second, Harry was sure he had imagined it, for 
when Dumbledore had returned to his seat behind 
the desk, he looked as old and weary as Harry had 
ever seen him. 

“Very well,” he said, sitting down again. “Voldemort 
has overcome that particular barrier. Harry, continue, 
please.” 

Harry went on; he explained how Voldemort had 
emerged from the cauldron, and told them all he 
could remember of Voldemort’s speech to the Death 
Eaters. Then he told how Voldemort had untied him, 
returned his wand to him, and prepared to duel. 

But when he reached the part where the golden beam 
of light had connected his and Voldemort’s wands, he 
found his throat obstructed. He tried to keep talking, 

Page | 768 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




but the memories of what had come out of 
Voldemort’s wand were flooding into his mind. He 
could see Cedric emerging, see the old man, Bertha 
Jorkins ... his father ... his mother ... 

He was glad when Sirius broke the silence. 

“The wands connected?” he said, looking from Harry 
to Dumbledore. “Why?” 

Harry looked up at Dumbledore again, on whose face 
there was an arrested look. 

“Priori Incantatem,” he muttered. 

His eyes gazed into Harry’s and it was almost as 
though an invisible beam of understanding shot 
between them. 

“The Reverse Spell effect?” said Sirius sharply. 

“Exactly,” said Dumbledore. “Harry’s wand and 
Voldemort’s wand share cores. Each of them contains 
a feather from the tail of the same phoenix. This 
phoenix, in fact,” he added, and he pointed at the 
scarlet-and-gold bird, perching peacefully on Harry’s 
knee. 

“My wand’s feather came from Fawkes?” Harry said, 
amazed. 

“Yes,” said Dumbledore. “Mr. Ollivander wrote to tell 
me you had bought the second wand, the moment 
you left his shop four years ago.” 

“So what happens when a wand meets its brother?” 
said Sirius. 



Page | 769 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“They will not work properly against each other,” said 
Dumbledore. “If, however, the owners of the wands 
force the wands to do battle ... a very rare effect will 
take place. One of the wands will force the other to 
regurgitate spells it has performed — in reverse. The 
most recent first ... and then those which preceded it. 



He looked interrogatively at Harry, and Harry nodded. 

“Which means,” said Dumbledore slowly, his eyes 
upon Harry’s face, “that some form of Cedric must 
have reappeared.” 

Harry nodded again. 

“Diggory came back to life?” said Sirius sharply. 

“No spell can reawaken the dead,” said Dumbledore 
heavily. “All that would have happened is a kind of 
reverse echo. A shadow of the living Cedric would 
have emerged from the wand . . . am I correct, Harry?” 

“He spoke to me,” Harry said. He was suddenly 
shaking again. “The ... the ghost Cedric, or whatever 
he was, spoke.” 

“An echo,” said Dumbledore, “which retained Cedric’s 
appearance and character. I am guessing other such 
forms appeared ... less recent victims of Voldemort’s 
wand. ...” 

“An old man,” Harry said, his throat still constricted. 
“Bertha Jorkins. And ...” 

“Your parents?” said Dumbledore quietly. 

“Yes,” said Harry. 



Page | 770 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Sirius’s grip on Harry’s shoulder was now so tight it 
was painful. 

“The last murders the wand performed,” said 
Dumbledore, nodding. “In reverse order. More would 
have appeared, of course, had you maintained the 
connection. Very well, Harry, these echoes, these 
shadows . . . what did they do?” 

Harry described how the figures that had emerged 
from the wand had prowled the edges of the golden 
web, how Voldemort had seemed to fear them, how 
the shadow of Harry’s father had told him what to do, 
how Cedric’s had made its final request. 

At this point, Harry found he could not continue. He 
looked around at Sirius and saw that he had his face 
in his hands. 

Harry suddenly became aware that Fawkes had left 
his knee. The phoenix had fluttered to the floor. It 
was resting its beautiful head against Harry’s injured 
leg, and thick, pearly tears were falling from its eyes 
onto the wound left by the spider. The pain vanished. 
The skin mended. His leg was repaired. 

“I will say it again,” said Dumbledore as the phoenix 
rose into the air and resettled itself upon the perch 
beside the door. “You have shown bravery beyond 
anything I could have expected of you tonight, Harry. 
You have shown bravery equal to those who died 
fighting Voldemort at the height of his powers. You 
have shouldered a grown wizard’s burden and found 
yourself equal to it — and you have now given us all 
that we have a right to expect. You will come with me 
to the hospital wing. I do not want you returning to 
the dormitory tonight. A Sleeping Potion, and some 
peace ... Sirius, would you like to stay with him?” 



Page | 771 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Sirius nodded and stood up. He transformed back 
into the great black dog and walked with Harry and 
Dumbledore out of the office, accompanying them 
down a flight of stairs to the hospital wing. 

When Dumbledore pushed open the door, Harry saw 
Mrs. Weasley, Bill, Ron, and Hermione grouped 
around a harassed-looking Madam Pomfrey. They 
appeared to be demanding to know where Harry was 
and what had happened to him. All of them whipped 
around as Harry, Dumbledore, and the black dog 
entered, and Mrs. Weasley let out a kind of muffled 
scream. 

“Harry! Oh Harry!” 

She started to hurry toward him, but Dumbledore 
moved between them. 

“Molly,” he said, holding up a hand, “please listen to 
me for a moment. Harry has been through a terrible 
ordeal tonight. He has just had to relive it for me. 
What he needs now is sleep, and peace, and quiet. If 
he would like you all to stay with him,” he added, 
looking around at Ron, Hermione, and Bill too, “you 
may do so. But I do not want you questioning him 
until he is ready to answer, and certainly not this 
evening.” 

Mrs. Weasley nodded. She was very white. She 
rounded on Ron, Hermione, and Bill as though they 
were being noisy, and hissed, “Did you hear? He 
needs quiet!” 

“Headmaster,” said Madam Pomfrey, staring at the 
great black dog that was Sirius, “may I ask what — ?” 

“This dog will be remaining with Harry for a while,” 
said Dumbledore simply. “I assure you, he is 

Page | 772 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




extremely well trained. Harry — I will wait while you 
get into bed.” 

Harry felt an inexpressible sense of gratitude to 
Dumbledore for asking the others not to question 
him. It wasn’t as though he didn’t want them there; 
but the thought of explaining it all over again, the 
idea of reliving it one more time, was more than he 
could stand. 

“I will be back to see you as soon as I have met with 
Fudge, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “I would like you to 
remain here tomorrow until I have spoken to the 
school.” He left. 

As Madam Pomfrey led Harry to a nearby bed, he 
caught sight of the real Moody lying motionless in a 
bed at the far end of the room. His wooden leg and 
magical eye were lying on the bedside table. 

“Is he okay?” Harry asked. 

“He’ll be fine,” said Madam Pomfrey, giving Harry 
some pajamas and pulling screens around him. He 
took off his robes, pulled on the pajamas, and got into 
bed. Ron, Hermione, Bill, Mrs. Weasley, and the black 
dog came around the screen and settled themselves 
in chairs on either side of him. Ron and Hermione 
were looking at him almost cautiously, as though 
scared of him. 

“I’m all right,” he told them. “Just tired.” 

Mrs. Weasley’s eyes filled with tears as she smoothed 
his bedcovers unnecessarily. 

Madam Pomfrey, who had bustled off to her office, 
returned holding a small bottle of some purple potion 
and a goblet. 

Page | 773 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You’ll need to drink all of this, Harry,” she said. “It’s 
a potion for dreamless sleep.” 

Harry took the goblet and drank a few mouthfuls. He 
felt himself becoming drowsy at once. Everything 
around him became hazy; the lamps around the 
hospital wing seemed to be winking at him in a 
friendly way through the screen around his bed; his 
body felt as though it was sinking deeper into the 
warmth of the feather matress. Before he could finish 
the potion, before he could say another word, his 
exhaustion had carried him off to sleep. 

Harry woke up, so warm, so very sleepy, that he 
didn’t open his eyes, wanting to drop off again. The 
room was still dimly lit; he was sure it was still 
nighttime and had a feeling that he couldn’t have 
been asleep very long. 

Then he heard whispering around him. 

“They’ll wake him if they don’t shut up!” 

“What are they shouting about? Nothing else can 
have happened, can it?” 

Harry opened his eyes blearily Someone had removed 
his glasses. He could see the fuzzy outlines of Mrs. 
Weasley and Bill close by. Mrs. Weasley was on her 
feet. 

“That’s Fudge’s voice,” she whispered. “And that’s 
Minerva McGonagall’s, isn’t it? But what are they 
arguing about?” 

Now Harry could hear them too: people shouting and 
running toward the hospital wing. 



Page | 774 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Regrettable, but all the same, Minerva — ” Cornelius 
Fudge was saying loudly. 

“You should never have brought it inside the castle!” 
yelled Professor McGonagall. “When Dumbledore 
finds out — ” 

Harry heard the hospital doors burst open. Unnoticed 
by any of the people around his bed, all of whom were 
staring at the door as Bill pulled back the screens, 
Harry sat up and put his glasses back on. 

Fudge came striding up the ward. Professors 
McGonagall and Snape were at his heels. 

“Where’s Dumbledore?” Fudge demanded of Mrs. 
Weasley. 

“He’s not here,” said Mrs. Weasley angrily. “This is a 
hospital wing, Minister, don’t you think you’d do 
better to — ” 

But the door opened, and Dumbledore came sweeping 
up the ward. 

“What has happened?” said Dumbledore sharply, 
looking from Fudge to Professor McGonagall. “Why 
are you disturbing these people? Minerva, I’m 
surprised at you — I asked you to stand guard over 
Barty Crouch — ” 

“There is no need to stand guard over him anymore, 
Dumbledore!” she shrieked. “The Minister has seen to 
that!” 

Harry had never seen Professor McGonagall lose 
control like this. There were angry blotches of color in 
her cheeks, and her hands were balled into fists; she 
was trembling with fury. 

Page | 775 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“When we told Mr. Fudge that we had caught the 
Death Eater responsible for tonight’s events,” said 
Snape, in a low voice, “he seemed to feel his personal 
safety was in question. He insisted on summoning a 
dementor to accompany him into the castle. He 
brought it up to the office where Barty Crouch — ” 

“I told him you would not agree, Dumbledore!” 
Professor McGonagall fumed. “I told him you would 
never allow dementors to set foot inside the castle, 
but — ” 

“My dear woman!” roared Fudge, who likewise looked 
angrier than Harry had ever seen him, “as Minister of 
Magic, it is my decision whether I wish to bring 
protection with me when interviewing a possibly 
dangerous — ” 

But Professor McGonagall’s voice drowned Fudge’s. 

“The moment that — that thing entered the room,” 
she screamed, pointing at Fudge, trembling all over, 
“it swooped down on Crouch and — and — ” 

Harry felt a chill in his stomach as Professor 
McGonagall struggled to find words to describe what 
had happened. He did not need her to finish her 
sentence. He knew what the dementor must have 
done. It had administered its fatal kiss to Barty 
Crouch. It had sucked his soul out through his 
mouth. He was worse than dead. 

“By all accounts, he is no loss!” blustered Fudge. “It 
seems he has been responsible for several deaths!” 

“But he cannot now give testimony, Cornelius,” said 
Dumbledore. He was staring hard at Fudge, as 
though seeing him plainly for the first time. “He 



Page | 776 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




cannot give evidence about why he killed those 
people.” 



“Why he killed them? Well, that’s no mystery, is it?” 
blustered Fudge. “He was a raving lunatic! From what 
Minerva and Severus have told me, he seems to have 
thought he was doing it all on You-Know- Who’s 
instructions!” 

“Lord Voldemort was giving him instructions, 
Cornelius,” Dumbledore said. “Those people’s deaths 
were mere by-products of a plan to restore Voldemort 
to full strength again. The plan succeeded. Voldemort 
has been restored to his body.” 

Fudge looked as though someone had just swung a 
heavy weight into his face. Dazed and blinking, he 
stared back at Dumbledore as if he couldn’t quite 
believe what he had just heard. He began to sputter, 
still goggling at Dumbledore. 

“You-Know- Who ... returned? Preposterous. Come 
now, Dumbledore ...” 

“As Minerva and Severus have doubtless told you,” 
said Dumbledore, “we heard Barry Crouch confess. 
Under the influence of Veritaserum, he told us how 
he was smuggled out of Azkaban, and how Voldemort 
— learning of his continued existence from Bertha 
Jorkins — went to free him from his father and used 
him to capture Harry. The plan worked, I tell you. 
Crouch has helped Voldemort to return.” 

“See here, Dumbledore,” said Fudge, and Harry was 
astonished to see a slight smile dawning on his face, 
“you — you can’t seriously believe that. You-Know- 
Who — back? Come now, come now . . . certainly, 
Crouch may have believed himself to be acting upon 

Page | 777 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




You-Know- Who’s orders — but to take the word of a 
lunatic like that, Dumbledore ...” 

“When Harry touched the Triwizard Cup tonight, he 
was transported straight to Voldemort,” said 
Dumbledore steadily. “He witnessed Lord Voldemort’s 
rebirth. I will explain it all to you if you will step up to 
my office.” 

Dumbledore glanced around at Harry and saw that he 
was awake, but shook his head and said, “I am afraid 
I cannot permit you to question Harry tonight.” 

Fudge’s curious smile lingered. He too glanced at 
Harry, then looked back at Dumbledore, and said, 
“You are — er — prepared to take Harry’s word on 
this, are you, Dumbledore?” 

There was a moment’s silence, which was broken by 
Sirius growling. His hackles were raised, and he was 
baring his teeth at Fudge. 

“Certainly, I believe Harry,” said Dumbledore. His 
eyes were blazing now. “I heard Crouch’s confession, 
and I heard Harry’s account of what happened after 
he touched the Triwizard Cup; the two stories make 
sense, they explain everything that has happened 
since Bertha Jorkins disappeared last summer.” 

Fudge still had that strange smile on his face. Once 
again, he glanced at Harry before answering. 

“You are prepared to believe that Lord Voldemort has 
returned, on the word of a lunatic murderer, and a 
boy who ... well ...” 

Fudge shot Harry another look, and Harry suddenly 
understood. 



Page | 778 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“You’ve been reading Rita Skeeter, Mr. Fudge,” he 
said quietly. 

Ron, Hermione, Mrs. Weasley, and Bill all jumped. 
None of them had realized that Harry was awake. 

Fudge reddened slightly, but a defiant and obstinate 
look came over his face. 

“And if I have?” he said, looking at Dumbledore. “If I 
have discovered that you’ve been keeping certain facts 
about the boy very quiet? A Parselmouth, eh? And 
having funny turns all over the place — ” 

“I assume that you are referring to the pains Harry 
has been experiencing in his scar?” said Dumbledore 
coolly. 

“You admit that he has been having these pains, 
then?” said Fudge quickly. “Headaches? Nightmares? 
Possibly — hallucinations?” 

“Listen to me, Cornelius,” said Dumbledore, taking a 
step toward Fudge, and once again, he seemed to 
radiate that indefinable sense of power that Harry 
had felt after Dumbledore had Stunned young 
Crouch. “Harry is as sane as you or I. That scar upon 
his forehead has not addled his brains. I believe it 
hurts him when Lord Voldemort is close by, or feeling 
particularly murderous.” 

Fudge had taken half a step back from Dumbledore, 
but he looked no less stubborn. 

“You’ll forgive me, Dumbledore, but I’ve never heard 
of a curse scar acting as an alarm bell before. ...” 

“Look, I saw Voldemort come back!” Harry shouted. 

He tried to get out of bed again, but Mrs. Weasley 

Page | 779 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




forced him back. “I saw the Death Eaters! I can give 
you their names! Lucius Malfoy — ” 

Snape made a sudden movement, but as Harry 
looked at him, Snape’s eyes flew back to Fudge. 

“Malfoy was cleared!” said Fudge, visibly affronted. “A 
very old family — donations to excellent causes — ” 

“Macnair!” Harry continued. 

“Also cleared! Now working for the Ministry!” 

“Avery — Nott — Crabbe — Goyle — ” 

“You are merely repeating the names of those who 
were acquitted of being Death Eaters thirteen years 
ago!” said Fudge angrily. “You could have found those 
names in old reports of the trials! For heaven’s sake, 
Dumbledore — the boy was full of some crackpot 
story at the end of last year too — his tales are getting 
taller, and you’re still swallowing them — the boy can 
talk to snakes, Dumbledore, and you still think he’s 
trustworthy?” 

“You fool!” Professor McGonagall cried. “Cedric 
Diggory! Mr. Crouch! These deaths were not the 
random work of a lunatic!” 

“I see no evidence to the contrary!” shouted Fudge, 
now matching her anger, his face purpling. “It seems 
to me that you are all determined to start a panic that 
will destabilize everything we have worked for these 
last thirteen years!” 

Harry couldn’t believe what he was hearing. He had 
always thought of Fudge as a kindly figure, a little 
blustering, a little pompous, but essentially good- 
natured. But now a short, angry wizard stood before 

Page | 780 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




him, refusing, point-blank, to accept the prospect of 
disruption in his comfortable and ordered world — to 
believe that Voldemort could have risen. 

“Voldemort has returned,” Dumbledore repeated. “If 
you accept that fact straightaway, Fudge, and take 
the necessary measures, we may still be able to save 
the situation. The first and most essential step is to 
remove Azkaban from the control of the dementors — ” 

“Preposterous!” shouted Fudge again. “Remove the 
dementors? I’d be kicked out of office for suggesting 
it! Half of us only feel safe in our beds at night 
because we know the dementors are standing guard 
at Azkaban!” 

“The rest of us sleep less soundly in our beds, 
Cornelius, knowing that you have put Lord 
Voldemort ’s most dangerous supporters in the care of 
creatures who will join him the instant he asks them!” 
said Dumbledore. “They will not remain loyal to you, 
Fudge! Voldemort can offer them much more scope 
for their powers and their pleasures than you can! 
With the dementors behind him, and his old 
supporters returned to him, you will be hard-pressed 
to stop him regaining the sort of power he had 
thirteen years ago!” 

Fudge was opening and closing his mouth as though 
no words could express his outrage. 

“The second step you must take — and at once,” 
Dumbledore pressed on, “is to send envoys to the 
giants.” 

“Envoys to the giants?” Fudge shrieked, finding his 
tongue again. “What madness is this?” 



Page | 781 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Extend them the hand of friendship, now, before it is 
too late,” said Dumbledore, “or Voldemort will 
persuade them, as he did before, that he alone among 
wizards will give them their rights and their freedom!” 

“You — you cannot be serious!” Fudge gasped, 
shaking his head and retreating further from 
Dumbledore. “If the magical community got wind that 
I had approached the giants — people hate them, 
Dumbledore — end of my career — ” 

“You are blinded,” said Dumbledore, his voice rising 
now, the aura of power around him palpable, his eyes 
blazing once more, “by the love of the office you hold, 
Cornelius! You place too much importance, and you 
always have done, on the so-called purity of blood! 

You fail to recognize that it matters not what someone 
is born, but what they grow to be! Your dementor has 
just destroyed the last remaining member of a pure- 
blood family as old as any — and see what that man 
chose to make of his life! I tell you now — take the 
steps I have suggested, and you will be remembered, 
in office or out, as one of the bravest and greatest 
Ministers of Magic we have ever known. Fail to act — 
and history will remember you as the man who 
stepped aside and allowed Voldemort a second chance 
to destroy the world we have tried to rebuild!” 

“Insane,” whispered Fudge, still backing away. “Mad 



And then there was silence. Madam Pomfrey was 
standing frozen at the foot of Harry’s bed, her hands 
over her mouth. Mrs. Weasley was still standing over 
Harry, her hand on his shoulder to prevent him from 
rising. Bill, Ron, and Hermione were staring at Fudge. 

“If your determination to shut your eyes will carry you 
as far as this, Cornelius,” said Dumbledore, “we have 

Page | 782 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




reached a parting of the ways. You must act as you 
see fit. And I — I shall act as I see fit.” 

Dumbledore ’s voice carried no hint of a threat; it 
sounded like a mere statement, but Fudge bristled as 
though Dumbledore were advancing upon him with a 
wand. 

“Now, see here, Dumbledore,” he said, waving a 
threatening finger. “I’ve given you free rein, always. 

I’ve had a lot of respect for you. I might not have 
agreed with some of your decisions, but I’ve kept 
quiet. There aren’t many who’d have let you hire 
werewolves, or keep Hagrid, or decide what to teach 
your students without reference to the Ministry. But if 
you’re going to work against me — ” 

“The only one against whom I intend to work,” said 
Dumbledore, “is Lord Voldemort. If you are against 
him, then we remain, Cornelius, on the same side.” 

It seemed Fudge could think of no answer to this. He 
rocked backward and forward on his small feet for a 
moment and spun his bowler hat in his hands. 

Finally, he said, with a hint of a plea in his voice, “He 
can’t be back, Dumbledore, he just can’t be ...” 

Snape strode forward, past Dumbledore, pulling up 
the left sleeve of his robes as he went. He stuck out 
his forearm and showed it to Fudge, who recoiled. 

“There,” said Snape harshly. “There. The Dark Mark. 

It is not as clear as it was an hour or so ago, when it 
burned black, but you can still see it. Every Death 
Eater had the sign burned into him by the Dark Lord. 
It was a means of distinguishing one another, and his 
means of summoning us to him. When he touched 
the Mark of any Death Eater, we were to Disapparate, 
and Apparate, instantly, at his side. This Mark has 
Page | 783 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




been growing clearer all year. Karkaroff’s too. Why do 
you think Karkaroff fled tonight? We both felt the 
Mark burn. We both knew he had returned. Karkaroff 
fears the Dark Lord’s vengeance. He betrayed too 
many of his fellow Death Eaters to be sure of a 
welcome back into the fold.” 

Fudge stepped back from Snape too. He was shaking 
his head. He did not seem to have taken in a word 
Snape had said. He stared, apparently repelled by the 
ugly mark on Snape ’s arm, then looked up at 
Dumbledore and whispered, “I don’t know what you 
and your staff are playing at, Dumbledore, but I have 
heard enough. I have no more to add. I will be in 
touch with you tomorrow, Dumbledore, to discuss the 
running of this school. I must return to the Ministry.” 

He had almost reached the door when he paused. He 
turned around, strode back down the dormitory, and 
stopped at Harry’s bed. 

“Your winnings,” he said shortly, taking a large bag of 
gold out of his pocket and dropping it onto Harry’s 
bedside table. “One thousand Galleons. There should 
have been a presentation ceremony, but under the 
circumstances ...” 

He crammed his bowler hat onto his head and walked 
out of the room, slamming the door behind him. The 
moment he had disappeared, Dumbledore turned to 
look at the group around Harry’s bed. 

“There is work to be done,” he said. “Molly ... am I 
right in thinking that I can count on you and 
Arthur?” 

“Of course you can,” said Mrs. Weasley. She was 
white to the lips, but she looked resolute. “We know 
what Fudge is. It’s Arthur’s fondness for Muggles that 

Page | 784 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




has held him back at the Ministry all these years. 
Fudge thinks he lacks proper wizarding pride.” 

“Then I need to send a message to Arthur,” said 
Dumbledore. “All those that we can persuade of the 
truth must be notified immediately, and he is well 
placed to contact those at the Ministry who are not as 
shortsighted as Cornelius.” 

“Ill go to Dad,” said Bill, standing up. “Ill go now.” 

“Excellent,” said Dumbledore. “Tell him what has 
happened. Tell him I will be in direct contact with him 
shortly. He will need to be discreet, however. If Fudge 
thinks I am interfering at the Ministry — ” 

“Leave it to me,” said Bill. 

He clapped a hand on Harry’s shoulder, kissed his 
mother on the cheek, pulled on his cloak, and strode 
quickly from the room. 

“Minerva,” said Dumbledore, turning to Professor 
McGonagall, “I want to see Hagrid in my office as 
soon as possible. Also — if she will consent to come — 
Madame Maxime.” 

Professor McGonagall nodded and left without a word. 

“Poppy,” Dumbledore said to Madam Pomfrey, “would 
you be very kind and go down to Professor Moody’s 
office, where I think you will find a house-elf called 
Winky in considerable distress? Do what you can for 
her, and take her back to the kitchens. I think Dobby 
will look after her for us.” 

“Very — very well,” said Madam Pomfrey, looking 
startled, and she too left. 



Page | 785 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore made sure that the door was closed, and 
that Madam Pomfrey’s footsteps had died away, 
before he spoke again. 

“And now,” he said, “it is time for two of our number 
to recognize each other for what they are. Sirius ... if 
you could resume your usual form.” 

The great black dog looked up at Dumbledore, then, 
in an instant, turned back into a man. 

Mrs. Weasley screamed and leapt back from the bed. 

“Sirius Black!” she shrieked, pointing at him. 

“Mum, shut up!” Ron yelled. “It’s okay!” 

Snape had not yelled or jumped backward, but the 
look on his face was one of mingled fury and horror. 

“Him!” he snarled, staring at Sirius, whose face 
showed equal dislike. “What is he doing here?” 

“He is here at my invitation,” said Dumbledore, 
looking between them, “as are you, Severus. I trust 
you both. It is time for you to lay aside your old 
differences and trust each other.” 

Harry thought Dumbledore was asking for a near 
miracle. Sirius and Snape were eyeing each other 
with the utmost loathing. 

“I will settle, in the short term,” said Dumbledore, 
with a bite of impatience in his voice, “for a lack of 
open hostility. You will shake hands. You are on the 
same side now. Time is short, and unless the few of 
us who know the truth do not stand united, there is 
no hope for any of us.” 



Page | 786 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Very slowly — but still glaring at each other as 
though each wished the other nothing but ill — Sirius 
and Snape moved toward each other and shook 
hands. They let go extremely quickly. 

“That will do to be going on with,” said Dumbledore, 
stepping between them once more. “Now I have work 
for each of you. Fudge’s attitude, though not 
unexpected, changes everything. Sirius, I need you to 
set off at once. You are to alert Remus Lupin, Arabella 
Figg, Mundungus Fletcher — the old crowd. Lie low at 
Lupins for a while; I will contact you there.” 

“But — ” said Harry. 

He wanted Sirius to stay. He did not want to have to 
say goodbye again so quickly. 

“You’ll see me very soon, Harry,” said Sirius, turning 
to him. “I promise you. But I must do what I can, you 
understand, don’t you?” 

“Yeah,” said Harry. “Yeah ... of course I do.” 

Sirius grasped his hand briefly, nodded to 
Dumbledore, transformed again into the black dog, 
and ran the length of the room to the door, whose 
handle he turned with a paw. Then he was gone. 

“Severus,” said Dumbledore, turning to Snape, “you 
know what I must ask you to do. If you are ready ... if 
you are prepared ...” 

“I am,” said Snape. 

He looked slightly paler than usual, and his cold, 
black eyes glittered strangely. 



Page | 787 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Then good luck,” said Dumbledore, and he watched, 
with a trace of apprehension on his face, as Snape 
swept wordlessly after Sirius. 

It was several minutes before Dumbledore spoke 
again. 

“I must go downstairs,” he said finally. “I must see the 
Diggorys. Harry — take the rest of your potion. I will 
see all of you later.” 

Harry slumped back against his pillows as 
Dumbledore disappeared. Hermione, Ron, and Mrs. 
Weasley were all looking at him. None of them spoke 
for a very long time. 

“You’ve got to take the rest of your potion, Harry,” 

Mrs. Weasley said at last. Her hand nudged the sack 
of gold on his bedside cabinet as she reached for the 
bottle and the goblet. “You have a good long sleep. Try 
and think about something else for a while . . . think 
about what you’re going to buy with your winnings!” 

“I don’t want that gold,” said Harry in an 
expressionless voice. “You have it. Anyone can have 
it. I shouldn’t have won it. It should’ve been Cedric’s.” 

The thing against which he had been fighting on and 
off ever since he had come out of the maze was 
threatening to overpower him. He could feel a 
burning, prickling feeling in the inner corners of his 
eyes. He blinked and stared up at the ceiling. 

“It wasn’t your fault, Harry,” Mrs. Weasley whispered. 

“I told him to take the cup with me,” said Harry. 

Now the burning feeling was in his throat too. He 
wished Ron would look away. 

Page | 788 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Mrs. Weasley set the potion down on the bedside 
cabinet, bent down, and put her arms around Harry. 
He had no memory of ever being hugged like this, as 
though by a mother. The full weight of everything he 
had seen that night seemed to fall in upon him as 
Mrs. Weasley held him to her. His mother’s face, his 
father’s voice, the sight of Cedric, dead on the ground 
all started spinning in his head until he could hardly 
bear it, until he was screwing up his face against the 
howl of misery fighting to get out of him. 

There was a loud slamming noise, and Mrs. Weasley 
and Harry broke apart. Hermione was standing by the 
window. She was holding something tight in her 
hand. 

“Sorry,” she whispered. 

“Your potion, Harry,” said Mrs. Weasley quickly, 
wiping her eyes on the back of her hand. 

Harry drank it in one gulp. The effect was 
instantaneous. Heavy, irresistible waves of dreamless 
sleep broke over him; he fell back onto his pillows and 
thought no more. 



Page | 789 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 






THE BEGINNING 

When he looked back, even a month later, Harry 
found he had only scattered memories of the next few 
days. It was as though he had been through too much 
to take in any more. The recollections he did have 
were very painful. The worst, perhaps, was the 
meeting with the Diggorys that took place the 
following morning. 

They did not blame him for what had happened; on 
the contrary, both thanked him for returning Cedric’s 
body to them. Mr. Diggory sobbed through most of 
the interview. Mrs. Diggory ’s grief seemed to be 
beyond tears. 

“He suffered very little then,” she said, when Harry 
had told her how Cedric had died. “And after all, 

Amos ... he died just when he’d won the tournament. 
He must have been happy.” 

When they got to their feet, she looked down at Harry 
and said, “You look after yourself, now.” 

Page | 790 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 



Harry seized the sack of gold on the bedside table. 

“You take this,” he muttered to her. “It should’ve been 
Cedric’s, he got there first, you take it — ” 

But she backed away from him. 

“Oh no, it’s yours, dear, I couldn’t ... you keep it.” 

Harry returned to Gryffindor Tower the following 
evening. From what Hermione and Ron told him, 
Dumbledore had spoken to the school that morning 
at breakfast. He had merely requested that they leave 
Harry alone, that nobody ask him questions or badger 
him to tell the story of what had happened in the 
maze. Most people, he noticed, were skirting him in 
the corridors, avoiding his eyes. Some whispered 
behind their hands as he passed. He guessed that 
many of them had believed Rita Skeeter’s article 
about how disturbed and possibly dangerous he was. 
Perhaps they were formulating their own theories 
about how Cedric had died. He found he didn’t care 
very much. He liked it best when he was with Ron 
and Hermione and they were talking about other 
things, or else letting him sit in silence while they 
played chess. He felt as though all three of them had 
reached an understanding they didn’t need to put 
into words; that each was waiting for some sign, some 
word, of what was going on outside Hogwarts — and 
that it was useless to speculate about what might be 
coming until they knew anything for certain. The only 
time they touched upon the subject was when Ron 
told Harry about a meeting Mrs. Weasley had had 
with Dumbledore before going home. 

“She went to ask him if you could come straight to us 
this summer,” he said. “But he wants you to go back 
to the Dursleys, at least at first.” 



Page | 791 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Why?” said Harry. 

“She said Dumbledore’s got his reasons,” said Ron, 
shaking his head darkly. “I suppose we’ve got to trust 
him, haven’t we?” 

The only person apart from Ron and Hermione that 
Harry felt able to talk to was Hagrid. As there was no 
longer a Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher, they 
had those lessons free. They used the one on 
Thursday afternoon to go down and visit Hagrid in his 
cabin. It was a bright and sunny day; Fang bounded 
out of the open door as they approached, barking and 
wagging his tail madly. 

“Who’s that?” called Hagrid, coming to the door. 

“ Harry\” 

He strode out to meet them, pulled Harry into a one- 
armed hug, ruffled his hair, and said, “Good ter see 
yeh, mate. Good ter see yeh.” 

They saw two bucket-size cups and saucers on the 
wooden table in front of the fireplace when they 
entered Hagrid ’s cabin. 

“Bin havin’ a cuppa with Olympe,” Hagrid said. “She’s 
jus’ left.” 

“Who?” said Ron curiously. 

“Madame Maxime, o’ course!” said Hagrid. 

“You two made up, have you?” said Ron. 

“Dunno what yeh’re talkin’ about,” said Hagrid airily, 
fetching more cups from the dresser. When he had 
made tea and offered around a plate of doughy 



Page | 792 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




cookies, he leaned back in his chair and surveyed 
Harry closely through his beetle-black eyes. 

“You all righ’?” he said gruffly. 

“Yeah,” said Harry. 

“No, yeh’re not,” said Hagrid. “ ’Course yeh’re not. But 
yeh will be.” 

Harry said nothing. 

“Knew he was goin’ ter come back,” said Hagrid, and 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked up at him, shocked. 
“Known it fer years, Harry. Knew he was out there, 
bidin’ his time. It had ter happen. Well, now it has, 
an’ we’ll jus’ have ter get on with it. We’ll fight. Migh’ 
be able ter stop him before he gets a good hold. That’s 
Dumbledore’s plan, anyway. Great man, Dumbledore. 
’S long as we’ve got him, I’m not too worried.” 

Hagrid raised his bushy eyebrows at the disbelieving 
expressions on their faces. 

“No good sittin’ worryin’ abou’ it,” he said. “What’s 
cornin’ will come, an’ we’ll meet it when it does. 
Dumbledore told me wha’ you did, Harry.” 

Hagrid’s chest swelled as he looked at Harry. 

“Yeh did as much as yer father would’ve done, an’ I 
can’ give yeh no higher praise than that.” 

Harry smiled back at him. It was the first time he’d 
smiled in days. “What’s Dumbledore asked you to do, 
Hagrid?” he asked. “He sent Professor McGonagall to 
ask you and Madame Maxime to meet him — that 
night.” 



Page | 793 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Got a little job fer me over the summer,” said Hagrid. 
“Secret, though. I’m not s’pposed ter talk abou’ it, no, 
not even ter you lot. Olympe — Madame Maxime ter 
you — might be cornin’ with me. I think she will. 
Think I got her persuaded.” 

“Is it to do with Voldemort?” 

Hagrid flinched at the sound of the name. 

“Migh’ be,” he said evasively. “Now ... who’d like ter 
come an’ visit the las’ skrewt with me? I was jokin’ — 
jokin’!” he added hastily, seeing the looks on their 
faces. 



k k k 



It was with a heavy heart that Harry packed his trunk 
up in the dormitory on the night before his return to 
Privet Drive. He was dreading the Leaving Feast, 
which was usually a cause for celebration, when the 
winner of the Inter-House Championship would be 
announced. He had avoided being in the Great Hall 
when it was full ever since he had left the hospital 
wing, preferring to eat when it was nearly empty to 
avoid the stares of his fellow students. 

When he, Ron, and Hermione entered the Hall, they 
saw at once that the usual decorations were missing. 
The Great Hall was normally decorated with the 
winning House’s colors for the Leaving Feast. Tonight, 
however, there were black drapes on the wall behind 
the teachers’ table. Harry knew instantly that they 
were there as a mark of respect to Cedric. 

The real Mad-Eye Moody was at the staff table now, 
his wooden leg and his magical eye back in place. He 
was extremely twitchy, jumping every time someone 



Page | 794 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




spoke to him. Harry couldn’t blame him; Moody’s fear 
of attack was bound to have been increased by his 
ten-month imprisonment in his own trunk. Professor 
Karkaroff’s chair was empty. Harry wondered, as he 
sat down with the other Gryffindors, where Karkaroff 
was now, and whether Voldemort had caught up with 
him. 

Madame Maxime was still there. She was sitting next 
to Hagrid. They were talking quietly together. Further 
along the table, sitting next to Professor McGonagall, 
was Snape. His eyes lingered on Harry for a moment 
as Harry looked at him. His expression was difficult to 
read. He looked as sour and unpleasant as ever. 

Harry continued to watch him, long after Snape had 
looked away. 

What was it that Snape had done on Dumbledore’s 
orders, the night that Voldemort had returned? And 
why ... why ... was Dumbledore so convinced that 
Snape was truly on their side? He had been their spy, 
Dumbledore had said so in the Pensieve. Snape had 
turned spy against Voldemort, “at great personal 
risk.” Was that the job he had taken up again? Had 
he made contact with the Death Eaters, perhaps? 
Pretended that he had never really gone over to 
Dumbledore, that he had been, like Voldemort 
himself, biding his time? 

Harry’s musings were ended by Professor 
Dumbledore, who stood up at the staff table. The 
Great Hall, which in any case had been less noisy 
than it usually was at the Leaving Feast, became very 
quiet. 

“The end,” said Dumbledore, looking around at them 
all, “of another year.” 



Page | 795 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




He paused, and his eyes fell upon the Hufflepuff 
table. Theirs had been the most subdued table before 
he had gotten to his feet, and theirs were still the 
saddest and palest faces in the Hall. 

“There is much that I would like to say to you all 
tonight,” said Dumbledore, “but I must first 
acknowledge the loss of a very fine person, who 
should be sitting here,” he gestured toward the 
Hufflepuffs, “enjoying our feast with us. I would like 
you all, please, to stand, and raise your glasses, to 
Cedric Diggory.” 

They did it, all of them; the benches scraped as 
everyone in the Hall stood, and raised their goblets, 
and echoed, in one loud, low, rumbling voice, “Cedric 
Diggory.” 

Harry caught a glimpse of Cho through the crowd. 
There were tears pouring silently down her face. He 
looked down at the table as they all sat down again. 

“Cedric was a person who exemplified many of the 
qualities that distinguish Hufflepuff house,” 
Dumbledore continued. “He was a good and loyal 
friend, a hard worker, he valued fair play. His death 
has affected you all, whether you knew him well or 
not. I think that you have the right, therefore, to 
know exactly how it came about.” 

Harry raised his head and stared at Dumbledore. 

“Cedric Diggory was murdered by Lord Voldemort.” 

A panicked whisper swept the Great Hall. People were 
staring at Dumbledore in disbelief, in horror. He 
looked perfectly calm as he watched them mutter 
themselves into silence. 



Page | 796 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“The Ministry of Magic,” Dumbledore continued, “does 
not wish me to tell you this. It is possible that some of 
your parents will be horrified that I have done so — 
either because they will not believe that Lord 
Voldemort has returned, or because they think I 
should not tell you so, young as you are. It is my 
belief, however, that the truth is generally preferable 
to lies, and that any attempt to pretend that Cedric 
died as the result of an accident, or some sort of 
blunder of his own, is an insult to his memory.” 

Stunned and frightened, every face in the Hall was 
turned toward Dumbledore now ... or almost every 
face. Over at the Slytherin table, Harry saw Draco 
Malfoy muttering something to Crabbe and Goyle. 
Harry felt a hot, sick swoop of anger in his stomach. 
He forced himself to look back at Dumbledore. 

“There is somebody else who must be mentioned in 
connection with Cedric’s death,” Dumbledore went 
on. “I am talking, of course, about Harry Potter.” 

A kind of ripple crossed the Great Hall as a few heads 
turned in Harry’s direction before flicking back to face 
Dumbledore. 

“Harry Potter managed to escape Lord Voldemort,” 
said Dumbledore. “He risked his own life to return 
Cedric’s body to Hogwarts. He showed, in every 
respect, the sort of bravery that few wizards have ever 
shown in facing Lord Voldemort, and for this, I honor 
him.” 

Dumbledore turned gravely to Harry and raised his 
goblet once more. Nearly everyone in the Great Hall 
followed suit. They murmured his name, as they had 
murmured Cedric’s, and drank to him. But through a 
gap in the standing figures, Harry saw that Malfoy, 
Crabbe, Goyle, and many of the other Slytherins had 
Page | 797 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




remained defiantly in their seats, their goblets 
untouched. Dumbledore, who after all possessed no 
magical eye, did not see them. 

When everyone had once again resumed their seats, 
Dumbledore continued, “The Triwizard Tournament’s 
aim was to further and promote magical 
understanding. In the light of what has happened — 
of Lord Voldemort’s return — such ties are more 
important than ever before.” 

Dumbledore looked from Madame Maxime and 
Hagrid, to Fleur Delacour and her fellow Beauxbatons 
students, to Viktor Krum and the Durmstrangs at the 
Slytherin table. Krum, Harry saw, looked wary, 
almost frightened, as though he expected Dumbledore 
to say something harsh. 

“Every guest in this Hall,” said Dumbledore, and his 
eyes lingered upon the Durmstrang students, “will be 
welcomed back here at any time, should they wish to 
come. I say to you all, once again — in the light of 
Lord Voldemort’s return, we are only as strong as we 
are united, as weak as we are divided. Lord 
Voldemort’s gift for spreading discord and enmity is 
very great. We can fight it only by showing an equally 
strong bond of friendship and trust. Differences of 
habit and language are nothing at all if our aims are 
identical and our hearts are open. 

“It is my belief — and never have I so hoped that I am 
mistaken — that we are all facing dark and difficult 
times. Some of you in this Hall have already suffered 
directly at the hands of Lord Voldemort. Many of your 
families have been torn asunder. A week ago, a 
student was taken from our midst. 

“Remember Cedric. Remember, if the time should 
come when you have to make a choice between what 

Page | 798 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




is right and what is easy, remember what happened 
to a boy who was good, and kind, and brave, because 
he strayed across the path of Lord Voldemort. 
Remember Cedric Diggory.” 

Harry’s trunk was packed; Hedwig was back in her 
cage on top of it. He, Ron, and Hermione were waiting 
in the crowded entrance hall with the rest of the 
fourth years for the carriages that would take them 
back to Hogsmeade station. It was another beautiful 
summer’s day. He supposed that Privet Drive would 
be hot and leafy, its flower beds a riot of color, when 
he arrived there that evening. The thought gave him 
no pleasure at all. 

“ ’Arry!” 

He looked around. Fleur Delacour was hurrying up 
the stone steps into the castle. Beyond her, far across 
the grounds, Harry could see Hagrid helping Madame 
Maxime to back two of the giant horses into their 
harness. The Beauxbatons carriage was about to take 
off. 

“We will see each uzzer again, I ’ope,” said Fleur as 
she reached him, holding out her hand. “I am ’oping 
to get a job ’ere, to improve my Eenglish.” 

“It’s very good already,” said Ron in a strangled sort of 
voice. Fleur smiled at him; Hermione scowled. 

“Good-bye, ’Arry,” said Fleur, turning to go. “It ’az 
been a pleasure meeting you!” 

Harry’s spirits couldn’t help but lift slightly as he 
watched Fleur hurry back across the lawns to 
Madame Maxime, her silvery hair rippling in the 
sunlight. 



Page | 799 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Wonder how the Durmstrang students are getting 
back,” said Ron. “D’you reckon they can steer that 
ship without Karkaroff?” 

“Karkaroff did not steer,” said a gruff voice. “He 
stayed in his cabin and let us do the vork.” 

Krum had come to say good-bye to Hermione. 

“Could I have a vord?” he asked her. 

“Oh ... yes ... all right,” said Hermione, looking 
slightly flustered, and following Krum through the 
crowd and out of sight. 

“You’d better hurry up!” Ron called loudly after her. 
“The carriages’ll be here in a minute!” 

He let Harry keep a watch for the carriages, however, 
and spent the next few minutes craning his neck over 
the crowd to try and see what Krum and Hermione 
might be up to. They returned quite soon. Ron stared 
at Hermione, but her face was quite impassive. 

“I liked Diggory,” said Krum abruptly to Harry. “He 
vos alvays polite to me. Alvays. Even though I vos 
from Durmstrang — with Karkaroff,” he added, 
scowling. 

“Have you got a new headmaster yet?” said Harry. 

Krum shrugged. He held out his hand as Fleur had 
done, shook Harry’s hand, and then Ron’s. Ron 
looked as though he was suffering some sort of 
painful internal struggle. Krum had already started 
walking away when Ron burst out, “Can I have your 
autograph?” 



Page | 800 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione turned away, smiling at the horseless 
carriages that were now trundling toward them up the 
drive, as Krum, looking surprised but gratified, signed 
a fragment of parchment for Ron. 



The weather could not have been more different on 
the journey back to King’s Cross than it had been on 
their way to Hogwarts the previous September. There 
wasn’t a single cloud in the sky. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione had managed to get a compartment to 
themselves. Pigwidgeon was once again hidden under 
Ron’s dress robes to stop him from hooting 
continually; Hedwig was dozing, her head under her 
wing, and Crookshanks was curled up in a spare seat 
like a large, furry ginger cushion. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione talked more fully and freely than they had 
all week as the train sped them southward. Harry felt 
as though Dumbledore’s speech at the Leaving Feast 
had unblocked him, somehow. It was less painful to 
discuss what had happened now. They broke off their 
conversation about what action Dumbledore might be 
taking, even now, to stop Voldemort only when the 
lunch trolley arrived. 

When Hermione returned from the trolley and put her 
money back into her schoolbag, she dislodged a copy 
of the Daily Prophet that she had been carrying in 
there. Harry looked at it, unsure whether he really 
wanted to know what it might say, but Hermione, 
seeing him looking at it, said calmly, “There’s nothing 
in there. You can look for yourself, but there’s 
nothing at all. I’ve been checking every day. Just a 
small piece the day after the third task saying you 
won the tournament. They didn’t even mention 
Cedric. Nothing about any of it. If you ask me, Fudge 
is forcing them to keep quiet.” 



Page | 801 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“He’ll never keep Rita quiet,” said Harry. “Not on a 
story like this.” 

“Oh, Rita hasn’t written anything at all since the third 
task,” said Hermione in an oddly constrained voice. 
“As a matter of fact,” she added, her voice now 
trembling slightly, “Rita Skeeter isn’t going to be 
writing anything at all for a while. Not unless she 
wants me to spill the beans on her.” 

“What are you talking about?” said Ron. 

“I found out how she was listening in on private 
conversations when she wasn’t supposed to be 
coming onto the grounds,” said Hermione in a rush. 

Harry had the impression that Hermione had been 
dying to tell them this for days, but that she had 
restrained herself in light of everything else that had 
happened. 

“How was she doing it?” said Harry at once. 

“How did you find out?” said Ron, staring at her. 

“Well, it was you, really, who gave me the idea, 

Harry,” she said. 

“Did I?” said Harry, perplexed. “How?” 

“Bugging,” said Hermione happily. 

“But you said they didn’t work — ” 

“Oh not electronic bugs,” said Hermione. “No, you see 
... Rita Skeeter” — Hermione ’s voice trembled with 
quiet triumph — “is an unregistered Animagus. She 
can turn — ” 



Page | 802 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione pulled a small sealed glass jar out of her 
bag. 

“ — into a beetle.” 

“You’re kidding,” said Ron. “You haven’t ... she’s not 



“Oh yes she is,” said Hermione happily, brandishing 
the jar at them. 

Inside were a few twigs and leaves and one large, fat 
beetle. 

“That’s never — you’re kidding — ” Ron whispered, 
lifting the jar to his eyes. 

“No, I’m not,” said Hermione, beaming. “I caught her 
on the windowsill in the hospital wing. Look very 
closely, and you 11 notice the markings around her 
antennae are exactly like those foul glasses she 
wears.” 

Harry looked and saw that she was quite right. He 
also remembered something. 

“There was a beetle on the statue the night we heard 
Hagrid telling Madame Maxime about his mum!” 

“Exactly,” said Hermione. “And Viktor pulled a beetle 
out of my hair after we’d had our conversation by the 
lake. And unless I’m very much mistaken, Rita was 
perched on the windowsill of the Divination class the 
day your scar hurt. She’s been buzzing around for 
stories all year.” 

“When we saw Malfoy under that tree ...” said Ron 
slowly. 



Page | 803 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“He was talking to her, in his hand,” said Hermione. 
“He knew, of course. That’s how she’s been getting all 
those nice little interviews with the Slytherins. They 
wouldn’t care that she was doing something illegal, as 
long as they were giving her horrible stuff about us 
and Hagrid.” 

Hermione took the glass jar back from Ron and 
smiled at the beetle, which buzzed angrily against the 
glass. 

“I’ve told her I’ll let her out when we get back to 
London,” said Hermione. “I’ve put an Unbreakable 
Charm on the jar, you see, so she can’t transform. 

And I’ve told her she’s to keep her quill to herself for a 
whole year. See if she can’t break the habit of writing 
horrible lies about people.” 

Smiling serenely, Hermione placed the beetle back 
inside her schoolbag. 

The door of the compartment slid open. 

“Very clever, Granger,” said Draco Malfoy. 

Crabbe and Goyle were standing behind him. All 
three of them looked more pleased with themselves, 
more arrogant and more menacing, than Harry had 
ever seen them. 

“So,” said Malfoy slowly, advancing slightly into the 
compartment and looking slowly around at them, a 
smirk quivering on his lips. “You caught some 
pathetic reporter, and Potter’s Dumbledore’s favorite 
boy again. Big deal.” 

His smirk widened. Crabbe and Goyle leered. 



Page | 804 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Trying not to think about it, are we?” said Malfoy 
softly, looking around at all three of them. “Trying to 
pretend it hasn’t happened?” 

“Get out,” said Harry. 

He had not been this close to Malfoy since he had 
watched him muttering to Crabbe and Goyle during 
Dumbledore’s speech about Cedric. He could feel a 
kind of ringing in his ears. His hand gripped his wand 
under his robes. 

“You’ve picked the losing side, Potter! I warned you! I 
told you you ought to choose your company more 
carefully, remember? When we met on the train, first 
day at Hogwarts? I told you not to hang around with 
riffraff like this!” He jerked his head at Ron and 
Hermione. “Too late now, Potter! They’ll be the first to 
go, now the Dark Lord’s back! Mudbloods and 
Muggle-lovers first! Well — second — Diggory was the 
f— ” 

It was as though someone had exploded a box of 
fireworks within the compartment. Blinded by the 
blaze of the spells that had blasted from every 
direction, deafened by a series of bangs, Harry 
blinked and looked down at the floor. 

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle were all lying unconscious 
in the doorway. He, Ron, and Hermione were on their 
feet, all three of them having used a different hex. Nor 
were they the only ones to have done so. 

“Thought we’d see what those three were up to,” said 
Fred matter-of-factly, stepping onto Goyle and into 
the compartment. He had his wand out, and so did 
George, who was careful to tread on Malfoy as he 
followed Fred inside. 



Page | 805 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Interesting effect,” said George, looking down at 
Crabbe. “Who used the Furnunculus Curse?” 

“Me,” said Harry. 

“Odd,” said George lightly. “I used Jelly-Legs. Looks 
as though those two shouldn’t be mixed. He seems to 
have sprouted little tentacles all over his face. Well, 
let’s not leave them here, they don’t add much to the 
decor.” 

Ron, Harry, and George kicked, rolled, and pushed 
the unconscious Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle — each of 
whom looked distinctly the worse for the jumble of 
jinxes with which they had been hit — out into the 
corridor, then came back into the compartment and 
rolled the door shut. 

“Exploding Snap, anyone?” said Fred, pulling out a 
pack of cards. 

They were halfway through their fifth game when 
Harry decided to ask them. 

“You going to tell us, then?” he said to George. “Who 
you were blackmailing?” 

“Oh,” said George darkly. “ That 

“It doesn’t matter,” said Fred, shaking his head 
impatiently. “It wasn’t anything important. Not now, 
anyway.” 

“We’ve given up,” said George, shrugging. 

But Harry, Ron, and Hermione kept on asking, and 
finally, Fred said, “All right, all right, if you really 
want to know ... it was Ludo Bagman.” 



Page | 806 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Bagman?” said Harry sharply. “Are you saying he 
was involved in — ” 

“Nah,” said George gloomily. “Nothing like that. 

Stupid git. He wouldn’t have the brains.” 

“Well, what, then?” said Ron. 

Fred hesitated, then said, “You remember that bet we 
had with him at the Quidditch World Cup? About how 
Ireland would win, but Krum would get the Snitch?” 

“Yeah,” said Harry and Ron slowly. 

“Well, the git paid us in leprechaun gold he’d caught 
from the Irish mascots.” 

“So?” 

“So,” said Fred impatiently, “it vanished, didn’t it? By 
next morning, it had gone!” 

“But — it must’ve been an accident, mustn’t it?” said 
Hermione. 

George laughed very bitterly. 

“Yeah, that’s what we thought, at first. We thought if 
we just wrote to him, and told him he’d made a 
mistake, he’d cough up. But nothing doing. Ignored 
our letter. We kept trying to talk to him about it at 
Hogwarts, but he was always making some excuse to 
get away from us.” 

“In the end, he turned pretty nasty,” said Fred. “Told 
us we were too young to gamble, and he wasn’t giving 
us anything.” 



Page | 807 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“So we asked for our money back,” said George 
glowering. 

“He didn’t refuse!” gasped Hermione. 

“Right in one,” said Fred. 

“But that was all your savings!” said Ron. 

“Tell me about it,” said George. “ ’Course, we found 
out what was going on in the end. Lee Jordan’s dad 
had had a bit of trouble getting money off Bagman as 
well. Turns out he’s in big trouble with the goblins. 
Borrowed loads of gold off them. A gang of them 
cornered him in the woods after the World Cup and 
took all the gold he had, and it still wasn’t enough to 
cover all his debts. They followed him all the way to 
Hogwarts to keep an eye on him. He’s lost everything 
gambling. Hasn’t got two Galleons to rub together. 
And you know how the idiot tried to pay the goblins 
back?” 

“How?” said Harry. 

“He put a bet on you, mate,” said Fred. “Put a big bet 
on you to win the tournament. Bet against the 
goblins.” 

“So that’s why he kept trying to help me win!” said 
Harry. “Well — I did win, didn’t I? So he can pay you 
your gold!” 

“Nope,” said George, shaking his head. “The goblins 
play as dirty as him. They say you drew with Diggory, 
and Bagman was betting you’d win outright. So 
Bagman had to run for it. He did run for it right after 
the third task.” 



Page | 808 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




George sighed deeply and started dealing out the 
cards again. 

The rest of the journey passed pleasantly enough; 
Harry wished it could have gone on all summer, in 
fact, and that he would never arrive at King’s Cross . . . 
but as he had learned the hard way that year, time 
will not slow down when something unpleasant lies 
ahead, and all too soon, the Hogwarts Express was 
pulling in at platform nine and three-quarters. The 
usual confusion and noise filled the corridors as the 
students began to disembark. Ron and Hermione 
struggled out past Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle, 
carrying their trunks. Harry, however, stayed put. 

“Fred — George — wait a moment.” 

The twins turned. Harry pulled open his trunk and 
drew out his Triwizard winnings. 

“Take it,” he said, and he thrust the sack into 
George’s hands. 

“What?” said Fred, looking flabbergasted. 

“Take it,” Harry repeated firmly. “I don’t want it.” 

“You’re mental,” said George, trying to push it back at 
Harry. 

“No, I’m not,” said Harry. “You take it, and get 
inventing. It’s for the joke shop.” 

“He is mental,” Fred said in an almost awed voice. 

“Listen,” said Harry firmly. “If you don’t take it, I’m 
throwing it down the drain. I don’t want it and I don’t 
need it. But I could do with a few laughs. We could all 



Page | 809 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




do with a few laughs. I’ve got a feeling we’re going to 
need them more than usual before long.” 

“Harry,” said George weakly, weighing the money bag 
in his hands, “there’s got to be a thousand Galleons 
in here.” 

“Yeah,” said Harry, grinning. “Think how many 
Canary Creams that is.” 

The twins stared at him. 

“Just don’t tell your mum where you got it ... 
although she might not be so keen for you to join the 
Ministry anymore, come to think of it. ...” 

“Harry,” Fred began, but Harry pulled out his wand. 

“Look,” he said flatly, “take it, or I’ll hex you. I know 
some good ones now. Just do me one favor, okay? 

Buy Ron some different dress robes and say they’re 
from you.” 

He left the compartment before they could say 
another word, stepping over Malfoy, Crabbe, and 
Goyle, who were still lying on the floor, covered in hex 
marks. 

Uncle Vernon was waiting beyond the barrier. Mrs. 
Weasley was close by him. She hugged Harry very 
tightly when she saw him and whispered in his ear, “I 
think Dumbledore will let you come to us later in the 
summer. Keep in touch, Harry.” 

“See you, Harry,” said Ron, clapping him on the back. 

“ ’Bye, Harry!” said Hermione, and she did something 
she had never done before, and kissed him on the 
cheek. 

Page | 810 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




“Harry — thanks,” George muttered, while Fred 
nodded fervently at his side. 

Harry winked at them, turned to Uncle Vernon, and 
followed him silently from the station. There was no 
point worrying yet, he told himself, as he got into the 
back of the Dursleys’ car. 

As Hagrid had said, what would come, would come... 
and he would have to meet it when it did. 



Page | 811 



Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling 




