
* J 



/ 




THE OTHER MINISTER 

It was nearing midnight and the Prime Minister was 
sitting alone in his office, reading a long memo that 
was slipping through his brain without leaving the 
slightest trace of meaning behind. He was waiting for 
a call from the President of a far distant country, and 
between wondering when the wretched man would 
telephone, and trying to suppress unpleasant 
memories of what had been a very long, tiring, and 
difficult week, there was not much space in his head 
for anything else. The more he attempted to focus on 
the print on the page before him, the more clearly the 
Prime Minister could see the gloating face of one of 
his political opponents. This particular opponent had 
appeared on the news that very day, not only to 
enumerate all the terrible things that had happened 
in the last week (as though anyone needed reminding) 
but also to explain why each and every one of them 
was the government’s fault. 

The Prime Minister’s pulse quickened at the very 
thought of these accusations, for they were neither 
fair nor true. How on earth was his government 

Page | 2 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



supposed to have stopped that bridge collapsing? It 
was outrageous for anybody to suggest that they were 
not spending enough on bridges. The bridge was 
fewer than ten years old, and the best experts were at 
a loss to explain why it had snapped cleanly in two, 
sending a dozen cars into the watery depths of the 
river below. And how dare anyone suggest that it was 
lack of policemen that had resulted in those two very 
nasty and well-publicized murders? Or that the 
government should have somehow foreseen the freak 
hurricane in the West Country that had caused so 
much damage to both people and property? And was 
it his fault that one of his Junior Ministers, Herbert 
Chorley, had chosen this week to act so peculiarly 
that he was now going to be spending a lot more time 
with his family? 

“A grim mood has gripped the country,” the opponent 
had concluded, barely concealing his own broad grin. 

And unfortunately, this was perfectly true. The Prime 
Minister felt it himself; people really did seem more 
miserable than usual. Even the weather was dismal; 
all this chilly mist in the middle of July. ... It wasn’t 
right, it wasn’t normal. ... 

He turned over the second page of the memo, saw 
how much longer it went on, and gave it up as a bad 
job. Stretching his arms above his head he looked 
around his office mournfully. It was a handsome 
room, with a fine marble fireplace facing the long sash 
windows, firmly closed against the unseasonable 
chill. With a slight shiver, the Prime Minister got up 
and moved over to the window, looking out at the thin 
mist that was pressing itself against the glass. It was 
then, as he stood with his back to the room, that he 
heard a soft cough behind him. 



Page | 3 



Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




He froze, nose to nose with his own scared-looking 
reflection in the dark glass. He knew that cough. He 
had heard it before. He turned very slowly to face the 
empty room. 

“Hello?” he said, trying to sound braver than he felt. 

For a brief moment he allowed himself the impossible 
hope that nobody would answer him. However, a 
voice responded at once, a crisp, decisive voice that 
sounded as though it were reading a prepared 
statement. It was coming — as the Prime Minister 
had known at the first cough — from the froglike little 
man wearing a long silver wig who was depicted in a 
small, dirty oil painting in the far corner of the room. 

“To the Prime Minister of Muggles. Urgent we meet. 
Kindly respond immediately. Sincerely, Fudge.” 

The man in the painting looked inquiringly at the 
Prime Minister. 

“Er,” said the Prime Minister, “listen. ... It’s not a very 
good time for me. ... I’m waiting for a telephone call, 
you see . . . from the President of — ” 

“That can be rearranged,” said the portrait at once. 
The Prime Minister’s heart sank. He had been afraid 
of that. 

“But I really was rather hoping to speak — ” 

“We shall arrange for the President to forget to call. 

He will telephone tomorrow night instead,” said the 
little man. “Kindly respond immediately to Mr. 

Fudge.” 

“I ... oh ... very well,” said the Prime Minister weakly. 
“Yes, I’ll see Fudge.” 

Page | 4 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




He hurried back to his desk, straightening his tie as 
he went. He had barely resumed his seat, and 
arranged his face into what he hoped was a relaxed 
and unfazed expression, when bright green flames 
burst into life in the empty grate beneath his marble 
mantelpiece. He watched, trying not to betray a flicker 
of surprise or alarm, as a portly man appeared within 
the flames, spinning as fast as a top. Seconds later, 
he had climbed out onto a rather fine antique rug, 
brushing ash from the sleeves of his long pin-striped 
cloak, a lime-green bowler hat in his hand. 

“Ah ... Prime Minister,” said Cornelius Fudge, striding 
forward with his hand outstretched. “Good to see you 
again.” 

The Prime Minister could not honestly return this 
compliment, so said nothing at all. He was not 
remotely pleased to see Fudge, whose occasional 
appearances, apart from being downright alarming in 
themselves, generally meant that he was about to 
hear some very bad news. Furthermore, Fudge was 
looking distinctly careworn. He was thinner, balder, 
and grayer, and his face had a crumpled look. The 
Prime Minister had seen that kind of look in 
politicians before, and it never boded well. 

“How can I help you?” he said, shaking Fudge’s hand 
very briefly and gesturing toward the hardest of the 
chairs in front of the desk. 

“Difficult to know where to begin,” muttered Fudge, 
pulling up the chair, sitting down, and placing his 
green bowler upon his knees. “What a week, what a 
week ...” 

“Had a bad one too, have you?” asked the Prime 
Minister stiffly, hoping to convey by this that he had 



Page | 5 



Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




quite enough on his plate already without any extra 
helpings from Fudge. 



“Yes, of course,” said Fudge, rubbing his eyes wearily 
and looking morosely at the Prime Minister. “I’ve been 
having the same week you have, Prime Minister. The 
Brockdale Bridge ... the Bones and Vance murders ... 
not to mention the ruckus in the West Country ...” 

“You — er — your — I mean to say, some of your 
people were — were involved in those — those things, 
were they?” 

Fudge fixed the Prime Minister with a rather stern 
look. “Of course they were,” he said. “Surely you’ve 
realized what’s going on?” 

“I ...” hesitated the Prime Minister. 

It was precisely this sort of behavior that made him 
dislike Fudge’s visits so much. He was, after all, the 
Prime Minister and did not appreciate being made to 
feel like an ignorant schoolboy. But of course, it had 
been like this from his very first meeting with Fudge 
on his very first evening as Prime Minister. He 
remembered it as though it were yesterday and knew 
it would haunt him until his dying day. 

He had been standing alone in this very office, 
savoring the triumph that was his after so many 
years of dreaming and scheming, when he had heard 
a cough behind him, just like tonight, and turned to 
find that ugly little portrait talking to him, 
announcing that the Minister of Magic was about to 
arrive and introduce himself. 

Naturally, he had thought that the long campaign and 
the strain of the election had caused him to go mad. 
He had been utterly terrified to find a portrait talking 

Page | 6 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




to him, though this had been nothing to how he felt 
when a self-proclaimed wizard had bounced out of the 
fireplace and shaken his hand. He had remained 
speechless throughout Fudge’s kindly explanation 
that there were witches and wizards still living in 
secret all over the world and his reassurances that he 
was not to bother his head about them as the 
Ministry of Magic took responsibility for the whole 
Wizarding community and prevented the non-magical 
population from getting wind of them. It was, said 
Fudge, a difficult job that encompassed everything 
from regulations on responsible use of broomsticks to 
keeping the dragon population under control (the 
Prime Minister remembered clutching the desk for 
support at this point). Fudge had then patted the 
shoulder of the still-dumbstruck Prime Minister in a 
fatherly sort of way. 

“Not to worry,” he had said, “it’s odds-on you’ll never 
see me again. I’ll only bother you if there’s something 
really serious going on our end, something that’s 
likely to affect the Muggles — the non-magical 
population, I should say. Otherwise, it’s live and let 
live. And I must say, you’re taking it a lot better than 
your predecessor. He tried to throw me out the 
window, thought I was a hoax planned by the 
opposition.” 

At this, the Prime Minister had found his voice at last. 
“You’re — you’re not a hoax, then?” 

It had been his last, desperate hope. 

“No,” said Fudge gently. “No, I’m afraid I’m not. Look.” 

And he had turned the Prime Minister’s teacup into a 
gerbil. 



Page | 7 



Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“But,” said the Prime Minister breathlessly, watching 
his teacup chewing on the corner of his next speech, 
“but why — why has nobody told me — ?” 

“The Minister of Magic only reveals him- or herself to 
the Muggle Prime Minister of the day,” said Fudge, 
poking his wand back inside his jacket. “We find it 
the best way to maintain secrecy.” 

“But then,” bleated the Prime Minister, “why hasn’t a 
former Prime Minister warned me — ?” 

At this, Fudge had actually laughed. 

“My dear Prime Minister, are you ever going to tell 
anybody?” 

Still chortling, Fudge had thrown some powder into 
the fireplace, stepped into the emerald flames, and 
vanished with a whooshing sound. The Prime 
Minister had stood there, quite motionless, and 
realized that he would never, as long as he lived, dare 
mention this encounter to a living soul, for who in the 
wide world would believe him? 

The shock had taken a little while to wear off. For a 
time, he had tried to convince himself that Fudge had 
indeed been a hallucination brought on by lack of 
sleep during his grueling election campaign. In a vain 
attempt to rid himself of all reminders of this 
uncomfortable encounter, he had given the gerbil to 
his delighted niece and instructed his private 
secretary to take down the portrait of the ugly little 
man who had announced Fudge’s arrival. To the 
Prime Minister’s dismay, however, the portrait had 
proved impossible to remove. When several 
carpenters, a builder or two, an art historian, and the 
Chancellor of the Exchequer had all tried 
unsuccessfully to prise it from the wall, the Prime 
Page | 8 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Minister had abandoned the attempt and simply 
resolved to hope that the thing remained motionless 
and silent for the rest of his term in office. 
Occasionally he could have sworn he saw out of the 
corner of his eye the occupant of the painting 
yawning, or else scratching his nose; even, once or 
twice, simply walking out of his frame and leaving 
nothing but a stretch of muddy-brown canvas behind. 
However, he had trained himself not to look at the 
picture very much, and always to tell himself firmly 
that his eyes were playing tricks on him when 
anything like this happened. 

Then, three years ago, on a night very like tonight, the 
Prime Minister had been alone in his office when the 
portrait had once again announced the imminent 
arrival of Fudge, who had burst out of the fireplace, 
sopping wet and in a state of considerable panic. 
Before the Prime Minister could ask why he was 
dripping all over the Axminster, Fudge had started 
ranting about a prison the Prime Minister had never 
heard of, a man named “Serious” Black, something 
that sounded like “Hogwarts,” and a boy called Harry 
Potter, none of which made the remotest sense to the 
Prime Minister. 

"... Fve just come from Azkaban,” Fudge had panted, 
tipping a large amount of water out of the rim of his 
bowler hat into his pocket. “Middle of the North Sea, 
you know, nasty flight . . . the dementors are in 
uproar” — he shuddered — “they’ve never had a 
breakout before. Anyway, I had to come to you, Prime 
Minister. Black’s a known Muggle killer and may be 
planning to rejoin You-Know-Who. ... But of course, 
you don’t even know who You-Know-Who is!” He had 
gazed hopelessly at the Prime Minister for a moment, 
then said, “Well, sit down, sit down, I’d better fill you 
in. ... Have a whiskey ...” 



Page | 9 



Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




The Prime Minister rather resented being told to sit 
down in his own office, let alone offered his own 
whiskey, but he sat nevertheless. Fudge pulled out 
his wand, conjured two large glasses full of amber 
liquid out of thin air, pushed one of them into the 
Prime Minister’s hand, and drew up a chair. 

Fudge had talked for more than an hour. At one 
point, he had refused to say a certain name aloud and 
wrote it instead on a piece of parchment, which he 
had thrust into the Prime Minister’s whiskey-free 
hand. When at last Fudge had stood up to leave, the 
Prime Minister had stood up too. 

“So you think that ...” He had squinted down at the 
name in his left hand. “Lord Vol — ” 

“ He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named\” snarled Fudge. 

“I’m sorry. ... You think that He-Who-Must-Not-Be- 
Named is still alive, then?” 

“Well, Dumbledore says he is,” said Fudge, as he had 
fastened his pin-striped cloak under his chin, “but 
we’ve never found him. If you ask me, he’s not 
dangerous unless he’s got support, so it’s Black we 
ought to be worrying about. You’ll put out that 
warning, then? Excellent. Well, I hope we don’t see 
each other again, Prime Minister! Good night.” 

But they had seen each other again. Less than a year 
later a harassed-looking Fudge had appeared out of 
thin air in the cabinet room to inform the Prime 
Minister that there had been a spot of bother at the 
Kwidditch (or that was what it had sounded like) 
World Cup and that several Muggles had been 
“involved,” but that the Prime Minister was not to 
worry, the fact that You-Know- Who’s Mark had been 
seen again meant nothing; Fudge was sure it was an 
Page | 10 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




isolated incident, and the Muggle Liaison Office was 
dealing with all memory modifications as they spoke. 

“Oh, and I almost forgot,” Fudge had added. “We’re 
importing three foreign dragons and a sphinx for the 
Triwizard Tournament, quite routine, but the 
Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical 
Creatures tells me that it’s down in the rule book that 
we have to notify you if we’re bringing highly 
dangerous creatures into the country.” 

“I — what — dragons?” spluttered the Prime Minister. 

“Yes, three,” said Fudge. “And a sphinx. Well, good 
day to you.” 

The Prime Minister had hoped beyond hope that 
dragons and sphinxes would be the worst of it, but 
no. Less than two years later, Fudge had erupted out 
of the fire yet again, this time with the news that 
there had been a mass breakout from Azkaban. 

“A mass breakout?” repeated the Prime Minister 
hoarsely. 

“No need to worry, no need to worry!” shouted Fudge, 
already with one foot in the flames. “We’ll have them 
rounded up in no time — just thought you ought to 
know!” 

And before the Prime Minister could shout, “Now, wait 
just one moment!” Fudge had vanished in a shower of 
green sparks. 

Whatever the press and the opposition might say, the 
Prime Minister was not a foolish man. It had not 
escaped his notice that, despite Fudge’s assurances 
at their first meeting, they were now seeing rather a 
lot of each other, nor that Fudge was becoming more 
Page | 11 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




flustered with each visit. Little though he liked to 
think about the Minister of Magic (or, as he always 
called Fudge in his head, the Other Minister), the 
Prime Minister could not help but fear that the next 
time Fudge appeared it would be with graver news 
still. The sight, therefore, of Fudge stepping out of the 
fire once more, looking disheveled and fretful and 
sternly surprised that the Prime Minister did not 
know exactly why he was there, was about the worst 
thing that had happened in the course of this 
extremely gloomy week. 

“How should I know what’s going on in the — er — 
Wizarding community?” snapped the Prime Minister 
now. “I have a country to run and quite enough 
concerns at the moment without — ” 

“We have the same concerns,” Fudge interrupted. 

“The Brockdale Bridge didn’t wear out. That wasn’t 
really a hurricane. Those murders were not the work 
of Muggles. And Herbert Chorley’s family would be 
safer without him. We are currently making 
arrangements to have him transferred to St. Mungo’s 
Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries. The move 
should be effected tonight.” 

“What do you ... I’m afraid I ... What?” blustered the 
Prime Minister. 

Fudge took a great, deep breath and said, “Prime 
Minister, I am very sorry to have to tell you that he’s 
back. He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is back.” 

“Back? When you say ‘back’ ... he’s alive? I mean — ” 

The Prime Minister groped in his memory for the 
details of that horrible conversation of three years 
previously, when Fudge had told him about the 
wizard who was feared above all others, the wizard 

Page | 12 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




who had committed a thousand terrible crimes before 
his mysterious disappearance fifteen years earlier. 

“Yes, alive,” said Fudge. “That is — I don’t know — is 
a man alive if he can’t be killed? I don’t really 
understand it, and Dumbledore won’t explain 
properly — but anyway, he’s certainly got a body and 
is walking and talking and killing, so I suppose, for 
the purposes of our discussion, yes, he’s alive.” 

The Prime Minister did not know what to say to this, 
but a persistent habit of wishing to appear well- 
informed on any subject that came up made him cast 
around for any details he could remember of their 
previous conversations. 

“Is Serious Black with — er — He-Who-Must-Not-Be- 
Named?” 

“Black? Black?” said Fudge distractedly, turning his 
bowler rapidly in his fingers. “Sirius Black, you 
mean? Merlin’s beard, no. Black’s dead. Turns out we 
were — er — mistaken about Black. He was innocent 
after all. And he wasn’t in league with He-Who-Must- 
Not-Be-Named either. I mean,” he added defensively, 
spinning the bowler hat still faster, “all the evidence 
pointed — we had more than fifty eyewitnesses — but 
anyway, as I say, he’s dead. Murdered, as a matter of 
fact. On Ministry of Magic premises. There’s going to 
be an inquiry, actually. ...” 

To his great surprise, the Prime Minister felt a fleeting 
stab of pity for Fudge at this point. It was, however, 
eclipsed almost immediately by a glow of smugness at 
the thought that, deficient though he himself might 
be in the area of materializing out of fireplaces, there 
had never been a murder in any of the government 
departments under his charge. ... Not yet, anyway ... 



Page | 13 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




While the Prime Minister surreptitiously touched the 
wood of his desk, Fudge continued, “But Black’s by- 
the-by now. The point is, we’re at war, Prime Minister, 
and steps must be taken.” 

“At war?” repeated the Prime Minister nervously. 
“Surely that’s a little bit of an overstatement?” 

“He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named has now been joined by 
those of his followers who broke out of Azkaban in 
January,” said Fudge, speaking more and more 
rapidly and twirling his bowler so fast that it was a 
lime-green blur. “Since they have moved into the 
open, they have been wreaking havoc. The Brockdale 
Bridge — he did it, Prime Minister, he threatened a 
mass Muggle killing unless I stood aside for him and 



“Good grief, so it’s your fault those people were killed 
and I’m having to answer questions about rusted 
rigging and corroded expansion joints and I don’t 
know what else!” said the Prime Minister furiously. 

“My fault!” said Fudge, coloring up. “Are you saying 
you would have caved in to blackmail like that?” 

“Maybe not,” said the Prime Minister, standing up 
and striding about the room, “but I would have put all 
my efforts into catching the blackmailer before he 
committed any such atrocity!” 

“Do you really think I wasn’t already making every 
effort?” demanded Fudge heatedly. “Every Auror in 
the Ministry was — and is — trying to find him and 
round up his followers, but we happen to be talking 
about one of the most powerful wizards of all time, a 
wizard who has eluded capture for almost three 
decades!” 



Page | 14 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“So I suppose you’re going to tell me he caused the 
hurricane in the West Country too?” said the Prime 
Minister, his temper rising with every pace he took. It 
was infuriating to discover the reason for all these 
terrible disasters and not to be able to tell the public, 
almost worse than it being the government’s fault 
after all. 

“That was no hurricane,” said Fudge miserably. 

“Excuse me!” barked the Prime Minister, now 
positively stamping up and down. “Trees uprooted, 
roofs ripped off, lampposts bent, horrible injuries — ” 

“It was the Death Eaters,” said Fudge. “He-Who-Must- 
Not-Be-Named’s followers. And ... and we suspect 
giant involvement.” 

The Prime Minister stopped in his tracks as though 
he had hit an invisible wall. “ What involvement?” 

Fudge grimaced. “He used giants last time, when he 
wanted to go for the grand effect,” he said. “The Office 
of Misinformation has been working around the clock, 
we’ve had teams of Obliviators out trying to modify 
the memories of all the Muggles who saw what really 
happened, we’ve got most of the Department for the 
Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures running 
around Somerset, but we can’t find the giant — it’s 
been a disaster.” 

“You don’t say!” said the Prime Minister furiously. 

“I won’t deny that morale is pretty low at the 
Ministry,” said Fudge. “What with all that, and then 
losing Amelia Bones.” 

“Losing who?” 



Page | 15 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Amelia Bones. Head of the Department of Magical 
Law Enforcement. We think He-Who-Must-Not-Be- 
Named may have murdered her in person, because 
she was a very gifted witch and — and all the 
evidence was that she put up a real fight.” 

Fudge cleared his throat and, with an effort, it 
seemed, stopped spinning his bowler hat. 

“But that murder was in the newspapers,” said the 
Prime Minister, momentarily diverted from his anger. 
“Our newspapers. Amelia Bones ... it just said she 
was a middle-aged woman who lived alone. It was a — 
a nasty killing, wasn’t it? It’s had rather a lot of 
publicity. The police are baffled, you see.” 

Fudge sighed. “Well, of course they are,” he said. 
“Killed in a room that was locked from the inside, 
wasn’t she? We, on the other hand, know exactly who 
did it, not that that gets us any further toward 
catching him. And then there was Emmeline Vance, 
maybe you didn’t hear about that one — ” 

“Oh yes I did!” said the Prime Minister. “It happened 
just around the corner from here, as a matter of fact. 
The papers had a field day with it, ‘breakdown of law 
and order in the Prime Minister’s backyard — ’ ” 

“And as if all that wasn’t enough,” said Fudge, barely 
listening to the Prime Minister, “we’ve got dementors 
swarming all over the place, attacking people left, 
right, and center. ...” 

Once upon a happier time this sentence would have 
been unintelligible to the Prime Minister, but he was 
wiser now. 

“I thought dementors guard the prisoners in 
Azkaban,” he said cautiously. 

Page | 16 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“They did,” said Fudge wearily. “But not anymore. 
They’ve deserted the prison and joined He-Who-Must- 
Not-Be-Named. I won’t pretend that wasn’t a blow.” 

“But,” said the Prime Minister, with a sense of 
dawning horror, “didn’t you tell me they’re the 
creatures that drain hope and happiness out of 
people?” 

“That’s right. And they’re breeding. That’s what’s 
causing all this mist.” 

The Prime Minister sank, weak-kneed, into the 
nearest chair. The idea of invisible creatures swooping 
through the towns and countryside, spreading 
despair and hopelessness in his voters, made him feel 
quite faint. 

“Now see here, Fudge — you’ve got to do something! 
It’s your responsibility as Minister of Magic!” 

“My dear Prime Minister, you can’t honestly think I’m 
still Minister of Magic after all this? I was sacked 
three days ago! The whole Wizarding community has 
been screaming for my resignation for a fortnight. I’ve 
never known them so united in my whole term of 
office!” said Fudge, with a brave attempt at a smile. 

The Prime Minister was momentarily lost for words. 
Despite his indignation at the position into which he 
had been placed, he still rather felt for the shrunken- 
looking man sitting opposite him. 

“I’m very sorry,” he said finally. “If there’s anything I 
can do?” 

“It’s very kind of you, Prime Minister, but there is 
nothing. I was sent here tonight to bring you up to 
date on recent events and to introduce you to my 

Page | 17 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




successor. I rather thought he’d be here by now, but 
of course, he’s very busy at the moment, with so 
much going on.” 

Fudge looked around at the portrait of the ugly little 
man wearing the long curly silver wig, who was 
digging in his ear with the point of a quill. Catching 
Fudge’s eye, the portrait said, “He’ll be here in a 
moment, he’s just finishing a letter to Dumbledore.” 

“I wish him luck,” said Fudge, sounding bitter for the 
first time. “I’ve been writing to Dumbledore twice a 
day for the past fortnight, but he won’t budge. If he’d 
just been prepared to persuade the boy, I might still 
be ... Well, maybe Scrimgeour will have more 
success.” 

Fudge subsided into what was clearly an aggrieved 
silence, but it was broken almost immediately by the 
portrait, which suddenly spoke in its crisp, official 
voice. 

“To the Prime Minister of Muggles. Requesting a 
meeting. Urgent. Kindly respond immediately. Rufus 
Scrimgeour, Minister of Magic.” 

“Yes, yes, fine,” said the Prime Minister distractedly, 
and he barely flinched as the flames in the grate 
turned emerald green again, rose up, and revealed a 
second spinning wizard in their heart, disgorging him 
moments later onto the antique rug. 

Fudge got to his feet and, after a moment’s hesitation, 
the Prime Minister did the same, watching the new 
arrival straighten up, dust down his long black robes, 
and look around. 

The Prime Minister’s first, foolish thought was that 
Rufus Scrimgeour looked rather like an old lion. 

Page | 18 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




There were streaks of gray in his mane of tawny hair 
and his bushy eyebrows; he had keen yellowish eyes 
behind a pair of wire-rimmed spectacles and a certain 
rangy, loping grace even though he walked with a 
slight limp. There was an immediate impression of 
shrewdness and toughness; the Prime Minister 
thought he understood why the Wizarding community 
preferred Scrimgeour to Fudge as a leader in these 
dangerous times. 

“How do you do?” said the Prime Minister politely, 
holding out his hand. 

Scrimgeour grasped it briefly, his eyes scanning the 
room, then pulled out a wand from under his robes. 

“Fudge told you everything?” he asked, striding over 
to the door and tapping the keyhole with his wand. 
The Prime Minister heard the lock click. 

“Er — yes,” said the Prime Minister. “And if you don’t 
mind, I’d rather that door remained unlocked.” 

“I’d rather not be interrupted,” said Scrimgeour 
shortly, “or watched,” he added, pointing his wand at 
the windows, so that the curtains swept across them. 
“Right, well, I’m a busy man, so let’s get down to 
business. First of all, we need to discuss your 
security.” 

The Prime Minister drew himself up to his fullest 
height and replied, “I am perfectly happy with the 
security I’ve already got, thank you very — ” 

“Well, we’re not,” Scrimgeour cut in. “It’ll be a poor 
lookout for the Muggles if their Prime Minister gets 
put under the Imperius Curse. The new secretary in 
your outer office — ” 



Page | 19 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




‘Tm not getting rid of Kingsley Shacklebolt, if that’s 
what you’re suggesting!” said the Prime Minister 
hotly. “He’s highly efficient, gets through twice the 
work the rest of them — ” 

“That’s because he’s a wizard,” said Scrimgeour, 
without a flicker of a smile. “A highly trained Auror, 
who has been assigned to you for your protection.” 

“Now, wait a moment!” declared the Prime Minister. 
“You can’t just put your people into my office, I decide 
who works for me — ” 

“I thought you were happy with Shacklebolt?” said 
Scrimgeour coldly. 

“I am — that’s to say, I was — ” 

“Then there’s no problem, is there?” said Scrimgeour. 

“I ... well, as long as Shacklebolt’s work continues to 
be ... er ... excellent,” said the Prime Minister lamely, 
but Scrimgeour barely seemed to hear him. 

“Now, about Herbert Chorley, your Junior Minister,” 
he continued. “The one who has been entertaining the 
public by impersonating a duck.” 

“What about him?” asked the Prime Minister. 

“He has clearly reacted to a poorly performed 
Imperius Curse,” said Scrimgeour. “It’s addled his 
brains, but he could still be dangerous.” 

“He’s only quacking!” said the Prime Minister weakly. 
“Surely a bit of a rest . . . Maybe go easy on the drink 



Page | 20 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“A team of Healers from St. Mungo’s Hospital for 
Magical Maladies and Injuries are examining him as 
we speak. So far he has attempted to strangle three of 
them,” said Scrimgeour. “I think it best that we 
remove him from Muggle society for a while.” 

“I ... well ... He’ll be all right, won’t he?” said the 
Prime Minister anxiously. 

Scrimgeour merely shrugged, already moving back 
toward the fireplace. 

“Well, that’s really all I had to say. I will keep you 
posted of developments, Prime Minister — or, at least, 
I shall probably be too busy to come personally, in 
which case I shall send Fudge here. He has consented 
to stay on in an advisory capacity.” 

Fudge attempted to smile, but was unsuccessful; he 
merely looked as though he had a toothache. 
Scrimgeour was already rummaging in his pocket for 
the mysterious powder that turned the fire green. The 
Prime Minister gazed hopelessly at the pair of them 
for a moment, then the words he had fought to 
suppress all evening burst from him at last. 

“But for heaven’s sake — you’re wizards'. You can do 
magic ! Surely you can sort out — well — anything !” 

Scrimgeour turned slowly on the spot and exchanged 
an incredulous look with Fudge, who really did 
manage a smile this time as he said kindly, “The 
trouble is, the other side can do magic too, Prime 
Minister.” 

And with that, the two wizards stepped one after the 
other into the bright green fire and vanished. 



Page | 21 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






SPINNER’S END 

Many miles away the chilly mist that had pressed 
against the Prime Minister’s windows drifted over a 
dirty river that wound between overgrown, rubbish- 
strewn banks. An immense chimney, relic of a 
disused mill, reared up, shadowy and ominous. There 
was no sound apart from the whisper of the black 
water and no sign of life apart from a scrawny fox that 
had slunk down the bank to nose hopefully at some 
old fish-and-chip wrappings in the tall grass. 

But then, with a very faint pop, a slim, hooded figure 
appeared out of thin air on the edge of the river. The 
fox froze, wary eyes fixed upon this strange new 
phenomenon. The figure seemed to take its bearings 
for a few moments, then set off with light, quick 
strides, its long cloak rustling over the grass. 

With a second and louder pop, another hooded figure 
materialized. 

“Wait!” 



Page | 22 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



The harsh cry startled the fox, now crouching almost 
flat in the undergrowth. It leapt from its hiding place 
and up the bank. There was a flash of green light, a 
yelp, and the fox fell back to the ground, dead. 

The second figure turned over the animal with its toe. 

“Just a fox,” said a woman’s voice dismissively from 
under the hood. “I thought perhaps an Auror — 

Cissy, wait!” 

But her quarry, who had paused and looked back at 
the flash of light, was already scrambling up the bank 
the fox had just fallen down. 

“Cissy — Narcissa — listen to me — ” 

The second woman caught the first and seized her 
arm, but the other wrenched it away. 

“Go back, Bella!” 

“You must listen to me!” 

“I’ve listened already. I’ve made my decision. Leave me 
alone!” 

The woman named Narcissa gained the top of the 
bank, where a line of old railings separated the river 
from a narrow, cobbled street. The other woman, 

Bella, followed at once. Side by side they stood 
looking across the road at the rows and rows of 
dilapidated brick houses, their windows dull and 
blind in the darkness. 

“He lives here?” asked Bella in a voice of contempt. 
“Here? In this Muggle dunghill? We must be the first 
of our kind ever to set foot — ” 



Page | 23 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




But Narcissa was not listening; she had slipped 
through a gap in the rusty railings and was already 
hurrying across the road. 

“Cissy, wait\” 

Bella followed, her cloak streaming behind, and saw 
Narcissa darting through an alley between the houses 
into a second, almost identical street. Some of the 
streetlamps were broken; the two women were 
running between patches of light and deep darkness. 
The pursuer caught up with her prey just as she 
turned another corner, this time succeeding in 
catching hold of her arm and swinging her around so 
that they faced each other. 

“Cissy, you must not do this, you can’t trust him — ” 

“The Dark Lord trusts him, doesn’t he?” 

“The Dark Lord is ... I believe ... mistaken,” Bella 
panted, and her eyes gleamed momentarily under her 
hood as she looked around to check that they were 
indeed alone. “In any case, we were told not to speak 
of the plan to anyone. This is a betrayal of the Dark 
Lord’s — ” 

“Let go, Bella!” snarled Narcissa, and she drew a 
wand from beneath her cloak, holding it threateningly 
in the other’s face. Bella merely laughed. 

“Cissy, your own sister? You wouldn’t — ” 

“There is nothing I wouldn’t do anymore!” Narcissa 
breathed, a note of hysteria in her voice, and as she 
brought down the wand like a knife, there was 
another flash of light. Bella let go of her sister’s arm 
as though burned. 



Page | 24 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Narcisscd” 



But Narcissa had rushed ahead. Rubbing her hand, 
her pursuer followed again, keeping her distance now, 
as they moved deeper into the deserted labyrinth of 
brick houses. At last, Narcissa hurried up a street 
named Spinner’s End, over which the towering mill 
chimney seemed to hover like a giant admonitory 
finger. Her footsteps echoed on the cobbles as she 
passed boarded and broken windows, until she 
reached the very last house, where a dim light 
glimmered through the curtains in a downstairs 
room. 

She had knocked on the door before Bella, cursing 
under her breath, had caught up. Together they stood 
waiting, panting slightly, breathing in the smell of the 
dirty river that was carried to them on the night 
breeze. After a few seconds, they heard movement 
behind the door and it opened a crack. A sliver of a 
man could be seen looking out at them, a man with 
long black hair parted in curtains around a sallow 
face and black eyes. 

Narcissa threw back her hood. She was so pale that 
she seemed to shine in the darkness; the long blonde 
hair streaming down her back gave her the look of a 
drowned person. 

“Narcissa!” said the man, opening the door a little 
wider, so that the light fell upon her and her sister 
too. “What a pleasant surprise!” 

“Severus,” she said in a strained whisper. “May I 
speak to you? It’s urgent.” 

“But of course.” 



Page | 25 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




He stood back to allow her to pass him into the 
house. Her still-hooded sister followed without 
invitation. 

“Snape,” she said curtly as she passed him. 

“Bellatrix,” he replied, his thin mouth curling into a 
slightly mocking smile as he closed the door with a 
snap behind them. 

They had stepped directly into a tiny sitting room, 
which had the feeling of a dark, padded cell. The walls 
were completely covered in books, most of them 
bound in old black or brown leather; a threadbare 
sofa, an old armchair, and a rickety table stood 
grouped together in a pool of dim light cast by a 
candle-filled lamp hung from the ceiling. The place 
had an air of neglect, as though it was not usually 
inhabited. 

Snape gestured Narcissa to the sofa. She threw off 
her cloak, cast it aside, and sat down, staring at her 
white and trembling hands clasped in her lap. 

Bellatrix lowered her hood more slowly. Dark as her 
sister was fair, with heavily lidded eyes and a strong 
jaw, she did not take her gaze from Snape as she 
moved to stand behind Narcissa. 

“So, what can I do for you?” Snape asked, settling 
himself in the armchair opposite the two sisters. 

“We ... we are alone, aren’t we?” Narcissa asked 
quietly. 

“Yes, of course. Well, Wormtail’s here, but we’re not 
counting vermin, are we?” 

He pointed his wand at the wall of books behind him 
and with a bang, a hidden door flew open, revealing a 

Page | 26 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




narrow staircase upon which a small man stood 
frozen. 

“As you have clearly realized, Wormtail, we have 
guests,” said Snape lazily. 

The man crept, hunchbacked, down the last few steps 
and moved into the room. He had small, watery eyes, 
a pointed nose, and wore an unpleasant simper. His 
left hand was caressing his right, which looked as 
though it was encased in a bright silver glove. 

“Narcissa!” he said, in a squeaky voice. “And Bellatrix! 
How charming — ” 

“Wormtail will get us drinks, if you’d like them,” said 
Snape. “And then he will return to his bedroom.” 

Wormtail winced as though Snape had thrown 
something at him. 

“I am not your servant!” he squeaked, avoiding 
Snape ’s eye. 

“Really? I was under the impression that the Dark 
Lord placed you here to assist me.” 

“To assist, yes — but not to make you drinks and — 
and clean your house!” 

“I had no idea, Wormtail, that you were craving more 
dangerous assignments,” said Snape silkily. “This can 
be easily arranged: I shall speak to the Dark Lord — ” 

“I can speak to him myself if I want to!” 

“Of course you can,” said Snape, sneering. “But in the 
meantime, bring us drinks. Some of the elf-made wine 
will do.” 

Page | 27 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Wormtail hesitated for a moment, looking as though 
he might argue, but then turned and headed through 
a second hidden door. They heard banging and a 
clinking of glasses. Within seconds he was back, 
bearing a dusty bottle and three glasses upon a tray. 
He dropped these on the rickety table and scurried 
from their presence, slamming the book-covered door 
behind him. 

Snape poured out three glasses of bloodred wine and 
handed two of them to the sisters. Narcissa 
murmured a word of thanks, whilst Bellatrix said 
nothing, but continued to glower at Snape. This did 
not seem to discompose him; on the contrary, he 
looked rather amused. 

“The Dark Lord,” he said, raising his glass and 
draining it. 

The sisters copied him. Snape refilled their glasses. 

As Narcissa took her second drink she said in a rush, 
“Severus, I’m sorry to come here like this, but I had to 
see you. I think you are the only one who can help me 



Snape held up a hand to stop her, then pointed his 
wand again at the concealed staircase door. There 
was a loud bang and a squeal, followed by the sound 
of Wormtail scurrying back up the stairs. 

“My apologies,” said Snape. “He has lately taken to 
listening at doors, I don’t know what he means by it. 

... You were saying, Narcissa?” 

She took a great, shuddering breath and started 
again. 

“Severus, I know I ought not to be here, I have been 
told to say nothing to anyone, but — ” 

Page | 28 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Then you ought to hold your tongue!” snarled 
Bellatrix. “Particularly in present company!” 

“ ‘Present company’?” repeated Snape sardonically. 
“And what am I to understand by that, Bellatrix?” 

“That I don’t trust you, Snape, as you very well 
know!” 

Narcissa let out a noise that might have been a dry 
sob and covered her face with her hands. Snape set 
his glass down upon the table and sat back again, his 
hands upon the arms of his chair, smiling into 
Bellatrix’s glowering face. 

“Narcissa, I think we ought to hear what Bellatrix is 
bursting to say; it will save tedious interruptions. 

Well, continue, Bellatrix,” said Snape. “Why is it that 
you do not trust me?” 

“A hundred reasons!” she said loudly, striding out 
from behind the sofa to slam her glass upon the table. 
“Where to start! Where were you when the Dark Lord 
fell? Why did you never make any attempt to find him 
when he vanished? What have you been doing all 
these years that you’ve lived in Dumbledore’s pocket? 
Why did you stop the Dark Lord procuring the 
Sorcerer’s Stone? Why did you not return at once 
when the Dark Lord was reborn? Where were you a 
few weeks ago when we battled to retrieve the 
prophecy for the Dark Lord? And why, Snape, is 
Harry Potter still alive, when you have had him at 
your mercy for five years?” 

She paused, her chest rising and falling rapidly, the 
color high in her cheeks. Behind her, Narcissa sat 
motionless, her face still hidden in her hands. 

Snape smiled. 

Page | 29 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Before I answer you — oh yes, Bellatrix, I am going 
to answer! You can carry my words back to the others 
who whisper behind my back, and carry false tales of 
my treachery to the Dark Lord! Before I answer you, I 
say, let me ask a question in turn. Do you really think 
that the Dark Lord has not asked me each and every 
one of those questions? And do you really think that, 
had I not been able to give satisfactory answers, I 
would be sitting here talking to you?” 

She hesitated. 

“I know he believes you, but ...” 

“You think he is mistaken? Or that I have somehow 
hoodwinked him? Fooled the Dark Lord, the greatest 
wizard, the most accomplished Legilimens the world 
has ever seen?” 

Bellatrix said nothing, but looked, for the first time, a 
little discomfited. Snape did not press the point. He 
picked up his drink again, sipped it, and continued, 
“You ask where I was when the Dark Lord fell. I was 
where he had ordered me to be, at Hogwarts School of 
Witchcraft and Wizardry, because he wished me to 
spy upon Albus Dumbledore. You know, I presume, 
that it was on the Dark Lord’s orders that I took up 
the post?” 

She nodded almost imperceptibly and then opened 
her mouth, but Snape forestalled her. 

“You ask why I did not attempt to find him when he 
vanished. For the same reason that Avery, Yaxley, the 
Carrows, Greyback, Lucius” — he inclined his head 
slightly to Narcissa — “and many others did not 
attempt to find him. I believed him finished. I am not 
proud of it, I was wrong, but there it is. ... If he had 



Page | 30 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




not forgiven we who lost faith at that time, he would 
have very few followers left.” 

“He’d have me!” said Bellatrix passionately. “I, who 
spent many years in Azkaban for him!” 

“Yes, indeed, most admirable,” said Snape in a bored 
voice. “Of course, you weren’t a lot of use to him in 
prison, but the gesture was undoubtedly fine — ” 

“Gesture!” she shrieked; in her fury she looked 
slightly mad. “While I endured the dementors, you 
remained at Hogwarts, comfortably playing 
Dumbledore’s pet!” 

“Not quite,” said Snape calmly. “He wouldn’t give me 
the Defense Against the Dark Arts job, you know. 
Seemed to think it might, ah, bring about a relapse . . . 
tempt me into my old ways.” 

“This was your sacrifice for the Dark Lord, not to 
teach your favorite subject?” she jeered. “Why did you 
stay there all that time, Snape? Still spying on 
Dumbledore for a master you believed dead?” 

“Hardly,” said Snape, “although the Dark Lord is 
pleased that I never deserted my post: I had sixteen 
years of information on Dumbledore to give him when 
he returned, a rather more useful welcome-back 
present than endless reminiscences of how 
unpleasant Azkaban is. ...” 

“But you stayed — ” 

“Yes, Bellatrix, I stayed,” said Snape, betraying a hint 
of impatience for the first time. “I had a comfortable 
job that I preferred to a stint in Azkaban. They were 
rounding up the Death Eaters, you know. 
Dumbledore’s protection kept me out of jail; it was 
Page | 31 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




most convenient and I used it. I repeat: The Dark 
Lord does not complain that I stayed, so I do not see 
why you do. 

“I think you next wanted to know,” he pressed on, a 
little more loudly, for Bellatrix showed every sign of 
interrupting, “why I stood between the Dark Lord and 
the Sorcerer’s Stone. That is easily answered. He did 
not know whether he could trust me. He thought, like 
you, that I had turned from faithful Death Eater to 
Dumbledore’s stooge. He was in a pitiable condition, 
very weak, sharing the body of a mediocre wizard. He 
did not dare reveal himself to a former ally if that ally 
might turn him over to Dumbledore or the Ministry. I 
deeply regret that he did not trust me. He would have 
returned to power three years sooner. As it was, I saw 
only greedy and unworthy Quirrell attempting to steal 
the stone and, I admit, I did all I could to thwart him.” 

Bellatrix’s mouth twisted as though she had taken an 
unpleasant dose of medicine. 

“But you didn’t return when he came back, you didn’t 
fly back to him at once when you felt the Dark Mark 
burn — ” 

“Correct. I returned two hours later. I returned on 
Dumbledore’s orders.” 

“On Dumbledore’s — ?” she began, in tones of 
outrage. 

“Think!” said Snape, impatient again. “Think! By 
waiting two hours, just two hours, I ensured that I 
could remain at Hogwarts as a spy! By allowing 
Dumbledore to think that I was only returning to the 
Dark Lord’s side because I was ordered to, I have 
been able to pass information on Dumbledore and the 
Order of the Phoenix ever since! Consider, Bellatrix: 
Page | 32 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




The Dark Mark had been growing stronger for 
months. I knew he must be about to return, all the 
Death Eaters knew! I had plenty of time to think 
about what I wanted to do, to plan my next move, to 
escape like Karkaroff, didn’t I? 

“The Dark Lord’s initial displeasure at my lateness 
vanished entirely, I assure you, when I explained that 
I remained faithful, although Dumbledore thought I 
was his man. Yes, the Dark Lord thought that I had 
left him forever, but he was wrong.” 

“But what use have you been?” sneered Bellatrix. 
“What useful information have we had from you?” 

“My information has been conveyed directly to the 
Dark Lord,” said Snape. “If he chooses not to share it 
with you — ” 

“He shares everything with me!” said Bellatrix, firing 
up at once. “He calls me his most loyal, his most 
faithful — ” 

“Does he?” said Snape, his voice delicately inflected to 
suggest his disbelief. “Does he still, after the fiasco at 
the Ministry?” 

“That was not my fault!” said Bellatrix, flushing. “The 
Dark Lord has, in the past, entrusted me with his 
most precious — if Lucius hadn’t — ” 

“Don’t you dare — don’t you dare blame my 
husband!” said Narcissa, in a low and deadly voice, 
looking up at her sister. 

“There is no point apportioning blame,” said Snape 
smoothly. “What is done, is done.” 



Page | 33 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“But not by you!” said Bellatrix furiously. “No, you 
were once again absent while the rest of us ran 
dangers, were you not, Snape?” 

“My orders were to remain behind,” said Snape. 
“Perhaps you disagree with the Dark Lord, perhaps 
you think that Dumbledore would not have noticed if 
I had joined forces with the Death Eaters to fight the 
Order of the Phoenix? And — forgive me — you speak 
of dangers ... you were facing six teenagers, were you 
not?” 

“They were joined, as you very well know, by half of 
the Order before long!” snarled Bellatrix. “And, while 
we are on the subject of the Order, you still claim you 
cannot reveal the whereabouts of their headquarters, 
don’t you?” 

“I am not the Secret-Keeper; I cannot speak the name 
of the place. You understand how the enchantment 
works, I think? The Dark Lord is satisfied with the 
information I have passed him on the Order. It led, as 
perhaps you have guessed, to the recent capture and 
murder of Emmeline Vance, and it certainly helped 
dispose of Sirius Black, though I give you full credit 
for finishing him off.” 

He inclined his head and toasted her. Her expression 
did not soften. 

“You are avoiding my last question, Snape. Harry 
Potter. You could have killed him at any point in the 
past five years. You have not done it. Why?” 

“Have you discussed this matter with the Dark Lord?” 
asked Snape. 

“He ... lately, we ... I am asking you, Snape!” 



Page | 34 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“If I had murdered Harry Potter, the Dark Lord could 
not have used his blood to regenerate, making him 
invincible — ” 

“You claim you foresaw his use of the boy!” she 
jeered. 

“I do not claim it; I had no idea of his plans; I have 
already confessed that I thought the Dark Lord dead. 

I am merely trying to explain why the Dark Lord is 
not sorry that Potter survived, at least until a year 
ago. ...” 

“But why did you keep him alive?” 

“Have you not understood me? It was only 
Dumbledore’s protection that was keeping me out of 
Azkaban! Do you disagree that murdering his favorite 
student might have turned him against me? But there 
was more to it than that. I should remind you that 
when Potter first arrived at Hogwarts there were still 
many stories circulating about him, rumors that he 
himself was a great Dark wizard, which was how he 
had survived the Dark Lord’s attack. Indeed, many of 
the Dark Lord’s old followers thought Potter might be 
a standard around which we could all rally once 
more. I was curious, I admit it, and not at all inclined 
to murder him the moment he set foot in the castle. 

“Of course, it became apparent to me very quickly 
that he had no extraordinary talent at all. He has 
fought his way out of a number of tight corners by a 
simple combination of sheer luck and more talented 
friends. He is mediocre to the last degree, though as 
obnoxious and self-satisfied as was his father before 
him. I have done my utmost to have him thrown out 
of Hogwarts, where I believe he scarcely belongs, but 
kill him, or allow him to be killed in front of me? I 



Page | 35 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




would have been a fool to risk it with Dumbledore 
close at hand.” 

“And through all this we are supposed to believe 
Dumbledore has never suspected you?” asked 
Bellatrix. “He has no idea of your true allegiance, he 
trusts you implicitly still?” 

“I have played my part well,” said Snape. “And you 
overlook Dumbledore’s greatest weakness: He has to 
believe the best of people. I spun him a tale of deepest 
remorse when I joined his staff, fresh from my Death 
Eater days, and he embraced me with open arms — 
though, as I say, never allowing me nearer the Dark 
Arts than he could help. Dumbledore has been a 
great wizard — oh yes, he has,” (for Bellatrix had 
made a scathing noise), “the Dark Lord acknowledges 
it. I am pleased to say, however, that Dumbledore is 
growing old. The duel with the Dark Lord last month 
shook him. He has since sustained a serious injury 
because his reactions are slower than they once were. 
But through all these years, he has never stopped 
trusting Severus Snape, and therein lies my great 
value to the Dark Lord.” 

Bellatrix still looked unhappy, though she appeared 
unsure how best to attack Snape next. Taking 
advantage of her silence, Snape turned to her sister. 

“Now ... you came to ask me for help, Narcissa?” 

Narcissa looked up at him, her face eloquent with 
despair. 

“Yes, Severus. I — I think you are the only one who 
can help me, I have nowhere else to turn. Lucius is in 
jail and ...” 



Page | 36 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




She closed her eyes and two large tears seeped from 
beneath her eyelids. 

“The Dark Lord has forbidden me to speak of it,” 
Narcissa continued, her eyes still closed. “He wishes 
none to know of the plan. It is ... very secret. But — ” 

“If he has forbidden it, you ought not to speak,” said 
Snape at once. “The Dark Lord’s word is law.” 

Narcissa gasped as though he had doused her with 
cold water. Bellatrix looked satisfied for the first time 
since she had entered the house. 

“There!” she said triumphantly to her sister. “Even 
Snape says so: You were told not to talk, so hold your 
silence!” 

But Snape had gotten to his feet and strode to the 
small window, peered through the curtains at the 
deserted street, then closed them again with a jerk. 

He turned around to face Narcissa, frowning. 

“It so happens that I know of the plan,” he said in a 
low voice. “I am one of the few the Dark Lord has told. 
Nevertheless, had I not been in on the secret, 

Narcissa, you would have been guilty of great 
treachery to the Dark Lord.” 

“I thought you must know about it!” said Narcissa, 
breathing more freely. “He trusts you so, Severus. ...” 

“You know about the plan?” said Bellatrix, her fleeting 
expression of satisfaction replaced by a look of 
outrage. “ You know?” 

“Certainly,” said Snape. “But what help do you 
require, Narcissa? If you are imagining I can persuade 



Page | 37 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




the Dark Lord to change his mind, I am afraid there is 
no hope, none at all.” 

“Severus,” she whispered, tears sliding down her pale 
cheeks. “My son ... my only son ...” 

“Draco should be proud,” said Bellatrix indifferently. 
“The Dark Lord is granting him a great honor. And I 
will say this for Draco: He isn’t shrinking away from 
his duty, he seems glad of a chance to prove himself, 
excited at the prospect — ” 

Narcissa began to cry in earnest, gazing beseechingly 
all the while at Snape. 

“That’s because he is sixteen and has no idea what 
lies in store! Why, Severus? Why my son? It is too 
dangerous! This is vengeance for Lucius’s mistake, I 
know it!” 

Snape said nothing. He looked away from the sight of 
her tears as though they were indecent, but he could 
not pretend not to hear her. 

“That’s why he’s chosen Draco, isn’t it?” she 
persisted. “To punish Lucius?” 

“If Draco succeeds,” said Snape, still looking away 
from her, “he will be honored above all others.” 

“But he won’t succeed!” sobbed Narcissa. “How can 
he, when the Dark Lord himself — ?” 

Bellatrix gasped; Narcissa seemed to lose her nerve. 

“I only meant ... that nobody has yet succeeded. ... 
Severus ... please ... You are, you have always been, 
Draco’s favorite teacher. ... You are Lucius’s old 
friend. ... I beg you. ... You are the Dark Lord’s 

Page | 38 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




favorite, his most trusted advisor. ... Will you speak to 
him, persuade him — ?” 

“The Dark Lord will not be persuaded, and I am not 
stupid enough to attempt it,” said Snape flatly. “I 
cannot pretend that the Dark Lord is not angry with 
Lucius. Lucius was supposed to be in charge. He got 
himself captured, along with how many others, and 
failed to retrieve the prophecy into the bargain. Yes, 
the Dark Lord is angry, Narcissa, very angry indeed.” 

“Then I am right, he has chosen Draco in revenge!” 
choked Narcissa. “He does not mean him to succeed, 
he wants him to be killed trying!” 

When Snape said nothing, Narcissa seemed to lose 
what little self-restraint she still possessed. Standing 
up, she staggered to Snape and seized the front of his 
robes. Her face close to his, her tears falling onto his 
chest, she gasped, “You could do it. You could do it 
instead of Draco, Severus. You would succeed, of 
course you would, and he would reward you beyond 
all of us — ” 

Snape caught hold of her wrists and removed her 
clutching hands. Looking down into her tears tained 
face, he said slowly, “He intends me to do it in the 
end, I think. But he is determined that Draco should 
try first. You see, in the unlikely event that Draco 
succeeds, I shall be able to remain at Hogwarts a little 
longer, fulfilling my useful role as spy.” 

“In other words, it doesn’t matter to him if Draco is 
killed!” 

“The Dark Lord is very angry,” repeated Snape 
quietly. “He failed to hear the prophecy. You know as 
well as I do, Narcissa, that he does not forgive easily.” 



Page | 39 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




She crumpled, falling at his feet, sobbing and 
moaning on the floor. 



“My only son ... my only son ...” 

“You should be proud!” said Bellatrix ruthlessly. “If I 
had sons, I would be glad to give them up to the 
service of the Dark Lord!” 

Narcissa gave a little scream of despair and clutched 
at her long blonde hair. Snape stooped, seized her by 
the arms, lifted her up, and steered her back onto the 
sofa. He then poured her more wine and forced the 
glass into her hand. 

“Narcissa, that’s enough. Drink this. Listen to me.” 

She quieted a little; slopping wine down herself, she 
took a shaky sip. 

“It might be possible ... for me to help Draco.” 

She sat up, her face paper-white, her eyes huge. 

“Severus — oh, Severus — you would help him? 

Would you look after him, see he comes to no harm?” 

“I can try.” 

She flung away her glass; it skidded across the table 
as she slid off the sofa into a kneeling position at 
Snape ’s feet, seized his hand in both of hers, and 
pressed her lips to it. 

“If you are there to protect him ... Severus, will you 
swear it? Will you make the Unbreakable Vow?” 

“The Unbreakable Vow?” 

Page | 40 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




Snape’s expression was blank, unreadable. Bellatrix, 
however, let out a cackle of triumphant laughter. 

“Aren’t you listening, Narcissa? Oh, he’ll try, I’m sure. 
... The usual empty words, the usual slithering out of 
action ... oh, on the Dark Lord’s orders, of course!” 

Snape did not look at Bellatrix. His black eyes were 
fixed upon Narcissa’s tear-filled blue ones as she 
continued to clutch his hand. 

“Certainly, Narcissa, I shall make the Unbreakable 
Vow,” he said quietly. “Perhaps your sister will 
consent to be our Bonder.” 

Bellatrix’s mouth fell open. Snape lowered himself so 
that he was kneeling opposite Narcissa. Beneath 
Bellatrix’s astonished gaze, they grasped right hands. 

“You will need your wand, Bellatrix,” said Snape 
coldly. 

She drew it, still looking astonished. 

“And you will need to move a little closer,” he said. 

She stepped forward so that she stood over them, and 
placed the tip of her wand on their linked hands. 

Narcissa spoke. 

“Will you, Severus, watch over my son, Draco, as he 
attempts to fulfill the Dark Lord’s wishes?” 

“I will,” said Snape. 

A thin tongue of brilliant flame issued from the wand 
and wound its way around their hands like a red-hot 
wire. 

Page | 41 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




“And will you, to the best of your ability, protect him 
from harm?” 

“I will,” said Snape. 

A second tongue of flame shot from the wand and 
interlinked with the first, making a fine, glowing 
chain. 

“And, should it prove necessary ... if it seems Draco 
will fail ...” whispered Narcissa (Snape’s hand 
twitched within hers, but he did not draw away), “will 
you carry out the deed that the Dark Lord has 
ordered Draco to perform?” 

There was a moment’s silence. Bellatrix watched, her 
wand upon their clasped hands, her eyes wide. 

“I will,” said Snape. 

Bellatrix’s astounded face glowed red in the blaze of a 
third tongue of flame, which shot from the wand, 
twisted with the others, and bound itself thickly 
around their clasped hands, like a rope, like a fiery 
snake. 



Page | 42 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




3 




WILL AND WON’T 

Harry Potter was snoring loudly. He had been sitting 
in a chair beside his bedroom window for the best 
part of four hours, staring out at the darkening street, 
and had finally fallen asleep with one side of his face 
pressed against the cold windowpane, his glasses 
askew and his mouth wide open. The misty fug his 
breath had left on the window sparkled in the orange 
glare of the streetlamp outside, and the artificial light 
drained his face of all color, so that he looked ghostly 
beneath his shock of untidy black hair. 

The room was strewn with various possessions and a 
good smattering of rubbish. Owl feathers, apple cores, 
and sweet wrappers littered the floor, a number of 
spellbooks lay higgledy-piggledy among the tangled 
robes on his bed, and a mess of newspapers sat in a 
puddle of light on his desk. The headline of one 
blared: 

HARRY POTTER: THE CHOSEN ONE? 



Page | 43 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



Rumors continue to fly about the mysterious recent 
disturbance at the Ministry of Magic, during which 
He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named was sighted once more. 

“We’re not allowed to talk about it, don’t ask me 
anything,” said one agitated Obliviator, who refused 
to give his name as he left the Ministry last night. 

Nevertheless, highly placed sources within the 
Ministry have confirmed that the disturbance 
centered on the fabled Hall of Prophecy. 

Though Ministry spokeswizards have hitherto refused 
even to confirm the existence of such a place, a 
growing number of the Wizarding community believe 
that the Death Eaters now serving sentences in 
Azkaban for trespass and attempted theft were 
attempting to steal a prophecy. The nature of that 
prophecy is unknown, although speculation is rife 
that it concerns Harry Potter, the only person ever 
known to have survived the Killing Curse, and who is 
also known to have been at the Ministry on the night 
in question. Some are going so far as to call Potter 
“the Chosen One,” believing that the prophecy names 
him as the only one who will be able to rid us of He- 
Who-Must-Not-Be-Named. 

The current whereabouts of the prophecy, if it exists, 
are unknown, although (ctd. page 2, column 5) 

A second newspaper lay beside the first. This one bore 
the headline: 

SCRIMGEOUR SUCCEEDS FUDGE 

Most of this front page was taken up with a large 
black-and-white picture of a man with a lionlike mane 
of thick hair and a rather ravaged face. The picture 
was moving — the man was waving at the ceiling. 

Page | 44 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Rufus Scrimgeour, previously Head of the Auror office 
in the Department of Magical Law Enforcement, has 
succeeded Cornelius Fudge as Minister of Magic. The 
appointment has largely been greeted with 
enthusiasm by the Wizarding community, though 
rumors of a rift between the new Minister and Albus 
Dumbledore, newly reinstated Chief Warlock of the 
Wizengamot, surfaced within hours of Scrimgeour 
taking office. 

Scrimgeour’s representatives admitted that he had met 
with Dumbledore at once upon taking possession of the 
top job, but refused to comment on the topics under 
discussion. Albus Dumbledore is known to (ctd. page 
3, column 2) 

To the left of this paper sat another, which had been 
folded so that a story bearing the title MINISTRY 
GUARANTEES STUDENTS’ SAFETY was visible. 

Newly appointed Minister of Magic, Rufus 
Scrimgeour, spoke today of the tough new measures 
taken by his Ministry to ensure the safety of students 
returning to Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and 
Wizardry this autumn. 

“For obvious reasons, the Ministry will not be going 
into detail about its stringent new security plans,” 
said the Minister, although an insider confirmed that 
measures include defensive spells and charms, a 
complex array of countercurses, and a small task 
force of Aurors dedicated solely to the protection of 
Hogwarts School. 

Most seem reassured by the new Minister’s tough 
stand on student safety. Said Mrs. Augusta 
Longbottom, “My grandson, Neville — a good friend of 
Harry Potter’s, incidentally, who fought the Death 
Eaters alongside him at the Ministry in June and — 
Page | 45 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




But the rest of this story was obscured by the large 
birdcage standing on top of it. Inside it was a 
magnificent snowy owl. Her amber eyes surveyed the 
room imperiously, her head swiveling occasionally to 
gaze at her snoring master. Once or twice she clicked 
her beak impatiently, but Harry was too deeply asleep 
to hear her. 

A large trunk stood in the very middle of the room. Its 
lid was open; it looked expectant; yet it was almost 
empty but for a residue of old underwear, sweets, 
empty ink bottles, and broken quills that coated the 
very bottom. Nearby, on the floor, lay a purple leaflet 
emblazoned with the words: 

— ISSUED ON BEHALF OF — 

THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC 

PROTECTING YOUR HOME AND FAMILY 

AGAINST DARK FORCES 

The Wizarding community is currently under threat 
from an organization calling itself the Death Eaters. 
Observing the following simple security guidelines will 
help protect you, your family, and your home from 
attack. 

1. You are advised not to leave the house alone. 

2. Particular care should be taken during the 
hours of darkness. Wherever possible, arrange to 
complete journeys before night has fallen. 

3. Review the security arrangements around your 
house, making sure that all family members are 
aware of emergency measures such as Shield and 



Page | 46 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Disillusionment Charms, and, in the case of underage 
family members, Side-Along-Apparition. 

4. Agree on security questions with close friends 
and family so as to detect Death Eaters masquerading 
as others by use of the Polyjuice Potion (see page 2). 

5. Should you feel that a family member, 
colleague, friend, or neighbor is acting in a strange 
manner, contact the Magical Law Enforcement Squad 
at once. They may have been put under the Imperius 
Curse (see page 4). 

6. Should the Dark Mark appear over any dwelling 
place or other building, DO NOT ENTER, but contact 
the Auror office immediately. 

7. Unconfirmed sightings suggest that the Death 
Eaters may now be using Inferi (see page 10). Any 
sighting of an Inferius, or encounter with same, 
should be reported to the Ministry IMMEDIATELY. 

Harry grunted in his sleep and his face slid down the 
window an inch or so, making his glasses still more 
lopsided, but he did not wake up. An alarm clock, 
repaired by Harry several years ago, ticked loudly on 
the sill, showing one minute to eleven. Beside it, held 
in place by Harry’s relaxed hand, was a piece of 
parchment covered in thin, slanting writing. Harry 
had read this letter so often since its arrival three 
days ago that although it had been delivered in a 
tightly furled scroll, it now lay quite flat. 

Dear Harry, 

If it is convenient to you, I shall call at number four, 
Privet Drive this coming Friday at eleven p.m. to escort 
you to the Burrow, where you have been invited to 
spend the remainder of your school holidays. 

Page | 47 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




If you are agreeable, I should also be glad of your 
assistance in a matter to which I hope to attend on the 
way to the Burrow. I shall explain this more fully when 
I see you. 

Kindly send your answer by return of this owl. Hoping 
to see you this Friday, 

I am, yours most sincerely, 

Albus Dumbledore 

Though he already knew it by heart, Harry had been 
stealing glances at this missive every few minutes 
since seven o’clock that evening, when he had first 
taken up his position beside his bedroom window, 
which had a reasonable view of both ends of Privet 
Drive. He knew it was pointless to keep rereading 
Dumbledore ’s words; Harry had sent back his “yes” 
with the delivering owl, as requested, and all he could 
do now was wait: Either Dumbledore was going to 
come, or he was not. 

But Harry had not packed. It just seemed too good to 
be true that he was going to be rescued from the 
Dursleys after a mere fortnight of their company. He 
could not shrug off the feeling that something was 
going to go wrong — his reply to Dumbledore ’s letter 
might have gone astray; Dumbledore could be 
prevented from collecting him; the letter might turn 
out not to be from Dumbledore at all, but a trick or 
joke or trap. Harry had not been able to face packing 
and then being let down and having to unpack again. 
The only gesture he had made to the possibility of a 
journey was to shut his snowy owl, Hedwig, safely in 
her cage. 



Page | 48 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




The minute hand on the alarm clock reached the 
number twelve and, at that precise moment, the 
streetlamp outside the window went out. 

Harry awoke as though the sudden darkness were an 
alarm. Hastily straightening his glasses and 
unsticking his cheek from the glass, he pressed his 
nose against the window instead and squinted down 
at the pavement. A tall figure in a long, billowing 
cloak was walking up the garden path. 

Harry jumped up as though he had received an 
electric shock, knocked over his chair, and started 
snatching anything and everything within reach from 
the floor and throwing it into the trunk. Even as he 
lobbed a set of robes, two spellbooks, and a packet of 
crisps across the room, the doorbell rang. Downstairs 
in the living room his Uncle Vernon shouted, “Who 
the blazes is calling at this time of night?” 

Harry froze with a brass telescope in one hand and a 
pair of trainers in the other. He had completely 
forgotten to warn the Dursleys that Dumbledore 
might be coming. Feeling both panicky and close to 
laughter, he clambered over the trunk and wrenched 
open his bedroom door in time to hear a deep voice 
say, “Good evening. You must be Mr. Dursley. I 
daresay Harry has told you I would be coming for 
him?” 

Harry ran down the stairs two at a time, coming to an 
abrupt halt several steps from the bottom, as long 
experience had taught him to remain out of arm’s 
reach of his uncle whenever possible. There in the 
doorway stood a tall, thin man with waist-length 
silver hair and beard. Half-moon spectacles were 
perched on his crooked nose, and he was wearing a 
long black traveling cloak and a pointed hat. Vernon 
Dursley, whose mustache was quite as bushy as 
Page | 49 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore ’s, though black, and who was wearing a 
puce dressing gown, was staring at the visitor as 
though he could not believe his tiny eyes. 

“Judging by your look of stunned disbelief, Harry did 
not warn you that I was coming,” said Dumbledore 
pleasantly. “However, let us assume that you have 
invited me warmly into your house. It is unwise to 
linger overlong on doorsteps in these troubled times.” 

He stepped smartly over the threshold and closed the 
front door behind him. 

“It is a long time since my last visit,” said 
Dumbledore, peering down his crooked nose at Uncle 
Vernon. “I must say, your agapanthus are 
flourishing.” 

Vernon Dursley said nothing at all. Harry did not 
doubt that speech would return to him, and soon — 
the vein pulsing in his uncle’s temple was reaching 
danger point — but something about Dumbledore 
seemed to have robbed him temporarily of breath. It 
might have been the blatant wizardishness of his 
appearance, but it might, too, have been that even 
Uncle Vernon could sense that here was a man whom 
it would be very difficult to bully. 

“Ah, good evening Harry,” said Dumbledore, looking 
up at him through his half-moon glasses with a most 
satisfied expression. “Excellent, excellent.” 

These words seemed to rouse Uncle Vernon. It was 
clear that as far as he was concerned, any man who 
could look at Harry and say “excellent” was a man 
with whom he could never see eye to eye. 

“I don’t mean to be rude — ” he began, in a tone that 
threatened rudeness in every syllable. 

Page | 50 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




“ — yet, sadly, accidental rudeness occurs alarmingly 
often,” Dumbledore finished the sentence gravely. 
“Best to say nothing at all, my dear man. Ah, and this 
must be Petunia.” 

The kitchen door had opened, and there stood Harry’s 
aunt, wearing rubber gloves and a housecoat over her 
nightdress, clearly halfway through her usual pre- 
bedtime wipe-down of all the kitchen surfaces. Her 
rather horsey face registered nothing but shock. 

“Albus Dumbledore,” said Dumbledore, when Uncle 
Vernon failed to effect an introduction. “We have 
corresponded, of course.” Harry thought this an odd 
way of reminding Aunt Petunia that he had once sent 
her an exploding letter, but Aunt Petunia did not 
challenge the term. “And this must be your son, 
Dudley?” 

Dudley had that moment peered round the living 
room door. His large, blond head rising out of the 
stripy collar of his pajamas looked oddly disembodied, 
his mouth gaping in astonishment and fear. 
Dumbledore waited a moment or two, apparently to 
see whether any of the Dursleys were going to say 
anything, but as the silence stretched on he smiled. 

“Shall we assume that you have invited me into your 
sitting room? 

Dudley scrambled out of the way as Dumbledore 
passed him. Harry, still clutching the telescope and 
trainers, jumped the last few stairs and followed 
Dumbledore, who had settled himself in the armchair 
nearest the fire and was taking in the surroundings 
with an expression of benign interest. He looked quite 
extraordinarily out of place. 



Page | 51 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Aren’t — aren’t we leaving, sir?” Harry asked 
anxiously. 

“Yes, indeed we are, but there are a few matters we 
need to discuss first,” said Dumbledore. “And I would 
prefer not to do so in the open. We shall trespass 
upon your aunt and uncle’s hospitality only a little 
longer.” 

“You will, will you?” 

Vernon Dursley had entered the room, Petunia at his 
shoulder, and Dudley skulking behind them both. 

“Yes,” said Dumbledore simply, “I shall.” 

He drew his wand so rapidly that Harry barely saw it; 
with a casual flick, the sofa zoomed forward and 
knocked the knees out from under all three of the 
Dursley s so that they collapsed upon it in a heap. 
Another flick of the wand and the sofa zoomed back 
to its original position. 

“We may as well be comfortable,” said Dumbledore 
pleasantly. 

As he replaced his wand in his pocket, Harry saw that 
his hand was blackened and shriveled; it looked as 
though his flesh had been burned away. 

“Sir — what happened to your — ?” 

“Later, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “Please sit down.” 

Harry took the remaining armchair, choosing not to 
look at the Dursleys, who seemed stunned into 
silence. 



Page | 52 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I would assume that you were going to offer me 
refreshment,” Dumbledore said to Uncle Vernon, “but 
the evidence so far suggests that that would be 
optimistic to the point of foolishness.” 

A third twitch of the wand, and a dusty bottle and five 
glasses appeared in midair. The bottle tipped and 
poured a generous measure of honey-colored liquid 
into each of the glasses, which then floated to each 
person in the room. 

“Madam Rosmerta’s finest oak-matured mead,” said 
Dumbledore, raising his glass to Harry, who caught 
hold of his own and sipped. He had never tasted 
anything like it before, but enjoyed it immensely. The 
Dursleys, after quick, scared looks at one another, 
tried to ignore their glasses completely, a difficult feat, 
as they were nudging them gently on the sides of their 
heads. Harry could not suppress a suspicion that 
Dumbledore was rather enjoying himself. 

“Well, Harry,” said Dumbledore, turning toward him, 
“a difficulty has arisen which I hope you will be able 
to solve for us. By us, I mean the Order of the 
Phoenix. But first of all I must tell you that Sirius’s 
will was discovered a week ago and that he left you 
everything he owned.” 

Over on the sofa, Uncle Vernon’s head turned, but 
Harry did not look at him, nor could he think of 
anything to say except, “Oh. Right.” 

“This is, in the main, fairly straightforward,” 
Dumbledore went on. “You add a reasonable amount 
of gold to your account at Gringotts, and you inherit 
all of Sirius’s personal possessions. The slightly 
problematic part of the legacy — ” 



Page | 53 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“His godfather’s dead?” said Uncle Vernon loudly from 
the sofa. Dumbledore and Harry both turned to look 
at him. The glass of mead was now knocking quite 
insistently on the side of Vernon’s head; he attempted 
to beat it away. “He’s dead? His godfather?” 

“Yes,” said Dumbledore. He did not ask Harry why he 
had not confided in the Dursleys. “Our problem,” he 
continued to Harry, as if there had been no 
interruption, “is that Sirius also left you number 
twelve, Grimmauld Place.” 

“He’s been left a house?” said Uncle Vernon greedily, 
his small eyes narrowing, but nobody answered him. 

“You can keep using it as headquarters,” said Harry. 

“I don’t care. You can have it, I don’t really want it.” 
Harry never wanted to set foot in number twelve, 
Grimmauld Place again if he could help it. He thought 
he would be haunted forever by the memory of Sirius 
prowling its dark musty rooms alone, imprisoned 
within the place he had wanted so desperately to 
leave. 

“That is generous,” said Dumbledore. “We have, 
however, vacated the building temporarily.” 

“Why?” 

“Well,” said Dumbledore, ignoring the mutterings of 
Uncle Vernon, who was now being rapped smartly 
over the head by the persistent glass of mead, “Black 
family tradition decreed that the house was handed 
down the direct line, to the next male with the name 
of ‘Black. ’ Sirius was the very last of the line as his 
younger brother, Regulus, predeceased him and both 
were childless. While his will makes it perfectly plain 
that he wants you to have the house, it is 
nevertheless possible that some spell or enchantment 
Page | 54 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




has been set upon the place to ensure that it cannot 
be owned by anyone other than a pureblood.” 



A vivid image of the shrieking, spitting portrait of 
Sirius’s mother that hung in the hall of number 
twelve, Grimmauld Place flashed into Harry’s mind. “I 
bet there has,” he said. 

“Quite,” said Dumbledore. “And if such an 
enchantment exists, then the ownership of the house 
is most likely to pass to the eldest of Sirius’s living 
relatives, which would mean his cousin, Bellatrix 
Lestrange.” 

Without realizing what he was doing, Harry sprang to 
his feet; the telescope and trainers in his lap rolled 
across the floor. Bellatrix Lestrange, Sirius’s killer, 
inherit his house? 

“No,” he said. 

“Well, obviously we would prefer that she didn’t get it 
either,” said Dumbledore calmly. “The situation is 
fraught with complications. We do not know whether 
the enchantments we ourselves have placed upon it, 
for example, making it Unplottable, will hold now that 
ownership has passed from Sirius’s hands. It might 
be that Bellatrix will arrive on the doorstep at any 
moment. Naturally we had to move out until such 
time as we have clarified the position.” 

“But how are you going to find out if I’m allowed to 
own it?” 

“Fortunately,” said Dumbledore, “there is a simple 
test.” 

He placed his empty glass on a small table beside his 
chair, but before he could do anything else, Uncle 

Page | 55 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Vernon shouted, “ Will you get these ruddy things off 
us?” 

Harry looked around; all three of the Dursleys were 
cowering with their arms over their heads as their 
glasses bounced up and down on their skulls, their 
contents flying everywhere. 

“Oh, I’m so sorry,” said Dumbledore politely, and he 
raised his wand again. All three glasses vanished. 

“But it would have been better manners to drink it, 
you know.” 

It looked as though Uncle Vernon was bursting with 
any number of unpleasant retorts, but he merely 
shrank back into the cushions with Aunt Petunia and 
Dudley and said nothing, keeping his small piggy eyes 
on Dumbledore ’s wand. 

“You see,” Dumbledore said, turning back to Harry 
and again speaking as though Uncle Vernon had not 
uttered, “if you have indeed inherited the house, you 
have also inherited — ” 

He flicked his wand for a fifth time. There was a loud 
crack, and a house-elf appeared, with a snout for a 
nose, giant bat’s ears, and enormous bloodshot eyes, 
crouching on the Dursleys’ shag carpet and covered 
in grimy rags. Aunt Petunia let out a hair-raising 
shriek; nothing this filthy had entered her house in 
living memory. Dudley drew his large, bare, pink feet 
off the floor and sat with them raised almost above 
his head, as though he thought the creature might 
run up his pajama trousers, and Uncle Vernon 
bellowed, “What the hell is that?” 

“Kreacher,” finished Dumbledore. 



Page | 56 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Kreacher won’t, Kreacher won’t, Kreacher won’t!” 
croaked the house-elf, quite as loudly as Uncle 
Vernon, stamping his long, gnarled feet and pulling 
his ears. “Kreacher belongs to Miss Bellatrix, oh yes, 
Kreacher belongs to the Blacks, Kreacher wants his 
new mistress, Kreacher won’t go to the Potter brat, 
Kreacher won’t, won’t, won’t — ” 

“As you can see, Harry,” said Dumbledore loudly, over 
Kreacher’s continued croaks of “won’t, won’t, won’t,” 
“Kreacher is showing a certain reluctance to pass into 
your ownership.” 

“I don’t care,” said Harry again, looking with disgust 
at the writhing, stamping house-elf. “I don’t want 
him.” 

“Won’t, won’t, won’t, won’t — ” 

“You would prefer him to pass into the ownership of 
Bellatrix Lestrange? Bearing in mind that he has lived 
at the headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix for 
the past year?” 

“Won’t, won’t, won’t, won’t — ” 

Harry stared at Dumbledore. He knew that Kreacher 
could not be permitted to go and live with Bellatrix 
Lestrange, but the idea of owning him, of having 
responsibility for the creature that had betrayed 
Sirius, was repugnant. 

“Give him an order,” said Dumbledore. “If he has 
passed into your ownership, he will have to obey. If 
not, then we shall have to think of some other means 
of keeping him from his rightful mistress.” 

“Won’t, won’t, won’t, WON’T.” 



Page | 57 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Kreacher’s voice had risen to a scream. Harry could 
think of nothing to say, except, “Kreacher, shut up!” 

It looked for a moment as though Kreacher was going 
to choke. He grabbed his throat, his mouth still 
working furiously, his eyes bulging. After a few 
seconds of frantic gulping, he threw himself face 
forward onto the carpet (Aunt Petunia whimpered) 
and beat the floor with his hands and feet, giving 
himself over to a violent, but entirely silent, tantrum. 

“Well, that simplifies matters,” said Dumbledore 
cheerfully. “It seems that Sirius knew what he was 
doing. You are the rightful owner of number twelve, 
Grimmauld Place and of Kreacher.” 

“Do I — do I have to keep him with me?” Harry asked, 
aghast, as Kreacher thrashed around at his feet. 

“Not if you don’t want to,” said Dumbledore. “If I 
might make a suggestion, you could send him to 
Hogwarts to work in the kitchen there. In that way, 
the other house-elves could keep an eye on him.” 

“Yeah,” said Harry in relief, “yeah, I’ll do that. Er — 
Kreacher — I want you to go to Hogwarts and work in 
the kitchens there with the other house-elves.” 

Kreacher, who was now lying flat on his back with his 
arms and legs in the air, gave Harry one upside-down 
look of deepest loathing and, with another loud crack, 
vanished. 

“Good,” said Dumbledore. “There is also the matter of 
the hippogriff, Buckbeak. Hagrid has been looking 
after him since Sirius died, but Buckbeak is yours 
now, so if you would prefer to make different 
arrangements — ” 



Page | 58 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No,” said Harry at once, “he can stay with Hagrid. I 
think Buckbeak would prefer that.” 

“Hagrid will be delighted,” said Dumbledore, smiling. 
“He was thrilled to see Buckbeak again. Incidentally, 
we have decided, in the interests of Buckbeak’s 
safety, to rechristen him ‘Witherwings’ for the time 
being, though I doubt that the Ministry would ever 
guess he is the hippogriff they once sentenced to 
death. Now, Harry, is your trunk packed?” 

“Erm ...” 

“Doubtful that I would turn up?” Dumbledore 
suggested shrewdly. 

“I’ll just go and — er — finish off,” said Harry hastily, 
hurrying to pick up his fallen telescope and trainers. 

It took him a little over ten minutes to track down 
everything he needed; at last he had managed to 
extract his Invisibility Cloak from under the bed, 
screwed the top back on his jar of color-change ink, 
and forced the lid of his trunk shut on his cauldron. 
Then, heaving his trunk in one hand and holding 
Hedwig’s cage in the other, he made his way back 
downstairs. 

He was disappointed to discover that Dumbledore was 
not waiting in the hall, which meant that he had to 
return to the living room. 

Nobody was talking. Dumbledore was humming 
quietly, apparently quite at his ease, but the 
atmosphere was thicker than cold custard, and Harry 
did not dare look at the Dursleys as he said, 

“Professor — I’m ready now.” 



Page | 59 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Good,” said Dumbledore. “Just one last thing, then.” 
And he turned to speak to the Dursleys once more. 

“As you will no doubt be aware, Harry comes of age in 
a year’s time — ” 

“No,” said Aunt Petunia, speaking for the first time 
since Dumbledore’s arrival. 

“I’m sorry?” said Dumbledore politely. 

“No, he doesn’t. He’s a month younger than Dudley, 
and Dudders doesn’t turn eighteen until the year after 
next.” 

“Ah,” said Dumbledore pleasantly, “but in the 
Wizarding world, we come of age at seventeen.” 

Uncle Vernon muttered, “Preposterous,” but 
Dumbledore ignored him. 

“Now, as you already know, the wizard called Lord 
Voldemort has returned to this country. The 
Wizarding community is currently in a state of open 
warfare. Harry, whom Lord Voldemort has already 
attempted to kill on a number of occasions, is in even 
greater danger now than the day when I left him upon 
your doorstep fifteen years ago, with a letter 
explaining about his parents’ murder and expressing 
the hope that you would care for him as though he 
were your own.” 

Dumbledore paused, and although his voice remained 
light and calm, and he gave no obvious sign of anger, 
Harry felt a kind of chill emanating from him and 
noticed that the Dursleys drew very slightly closer 
together. 



Page | 60 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You did not do as I asked. You have never treated 
Harry as a son. He has known nothing but neglect 
and often cruelty at your hands. The best that can be 
said is that he has at least escaped the appalling 
damage you have inflicted upon the unfortunate boy 
sitting between you.” 

Both Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon looked around 
instinctively, as though expecting to see someone 
other than Dudley squeezed between them. 

“Us — mistreat Dudders? What d’you — ?” began 
Uncle Vernon furiously, but Dumbledore raised his 
finger for silence, a silence which fell as though he 
had struck Uncle Vernon dumb. 

“The magic I evoked fifteen years ago means that 
Harry has powerful protection while he can still call 
this house ‘home.’ However miserable he has been 
here, however unwelcome, however badly treated, you 
have at least, grudgingly, allowed him houseroom. 
This magic will cease to operate the moment that 
Harry turns seventeen; in other words, at the moment 
he becomes a man. I ask only this: that you allow 
Harry to return, once more, to this house, before his 
seventeenth birthday, which will ensure that the 
protection continues until that time.” 

None of the Dursleys said anything. Dudley was 
frowning slightly, as though he was still trying to 
work out when he had ever been mistreated. Uncle 
Vernon looked as though he had something stuck in 
his throat; Aunt Petunia, however, was oddly flushed. 

“Well, Harry ... time for us to be off,” said Dumbledore 
at last, standing up and straightening his long black 
cloak. “Until we meet again,” he said to the Dursleys, 
who looked as though that moment could wait forever 



Page | 61 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




as far as they were concerned, and after doffing his 
hat, he swept from the room. 

“Bye,” said Harry hastily to the Dursleys, and followed 
Dumbledore, who paused beside Harry’s trunk, upon 
which Hedwig’s cage was perched. 

“We do not want to be encumbered by these just 
now,” he said, pulling out his wand again. “I shall 
send them to the Burrow to await us there. However, I 
would like you to bring your Invisibility Cloak ... just 
in case.” 

Harry extracted his cloak from his trunk with some 
difficulty, trying not to show Dumbledore the mess 
within. When he had stuffed it into an inside pocket 
of his jacket, Dumbledore waved his wand and the 
trunk, cage, and Hedwig vanished. Dumbledore then 
waved his wand again, and the front door opened 
onto cool, misty darkness. 

“And now, Harry, let us step out into the night and 
pursue that flighty temptress, adventure.” 



Page | 62 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






HORACE SLUGHORN 

Despite the fact that he had spent every waking 
moment of the past few days hoping desperately that 
Dumbledore would indeed come to fetch him, Harry 
felt distinctly awkward as they set off down Privet 
Drive together. He had never had a proper 
conversation with the headmaster outside of 
Hogwarts before; there was usually a desk between 
them. The memory of their last face-to-face encounter 
kept intruding too, and it rather heightened Harry’s 
sense of embarrassment; he had shouted a lot on that 
occasion, not to mention done his best to smash 
several of Dumbledore ’s most prized possessions. 

Dumbledore, however, seemed completely relaxed. 

“Keep your wand at the ready, Harry,” he said 
brightly. 

“But I thought I’m not allowed to use magic outside 
school, sir?” 



Page | 63 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



“If there is an attack,” said Dumbledore, “I give you 
permission to use any counterjinx or curse that might 
occur to you. However, I do not think you need worry 
about being attacked tonight.” 

“Why not, sir?” 

“You are with me,” said Dumbledore simply. “This will 
do, Harry.” 

He came to an abrupt halt at the end of Privet Drive. 

“You have not, of course, passed your Apparition 
Test,” he said. 

“No,” said Harry. “I thought you had to be seventeen?” 

“You do,” said Dumbledore. “So you will need to hold 
on to my arm very tightly. My left, if you don’t mind — 
as you have noticed, my wand arm is a little fragile at 
the moment.” 

Harry gripped Dumbledore’s proffered forearm. 

“Very good,” said Dumbledore. “Well, here we go.” 

Harry felt Dumbledore’s arm twist away from him and 
redoubled his grip; the next thing he knew, everything 
went black; he was being pressed very hard from all 
directions; he could not breathe, there were iron 
bands tightening around his chest; his eyeballs were 
being forced back into his head; his eardrums were 
being pushed deeper into his skull and then — 

He gulped great lungfuls of cold night air and opened 
his streaming eyes. He felt as though he had just 
been forced through a very tight rubber tube. It was a 
few seconds before he realized that Privet Drive had 
vanished. He and Dumbledore were now standing in 
Page | 64 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




what appeared to be a deserted village square, in the 
center of which stood an old war memorial and a few 
benches. His comprehension catching up with his 
senses, Harry realized that he had just Apparated for 
the first time in his life. 

“Are you all right?” asked Dumbledore, looking down 
at him solicitously. “The sensation does take some 
getting used to.” 

“I’m fine,” said Harry, rubbing his ears, which felt as 
though they had left Privet Drive rather reluctantly. 
“But I think I might prefer brooms. ...” 

Dumbledore smiled, drew his traveling cloak a little 
more tightly around his neck, and said, “This way.” 

He set off at a brisk pace, past an empty inn and a 
few houses. According to a clock on a nearby church, 
it was almost midnight. 

“So tell me, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “Your scar ... 
has it been hurting at all?” 

Harry raised a hand unconsciously to his forehead 
and rubbed the lightning-shaped mark. 

“No,” he said, “and IVe been wondering about that. I 
thought it would be burning all the time now 
Voldemort’s getting so powerful again.” 

He glanced up at Dumbledore and saw that he was 
wearing a satisfied expression. 

“I, on the other hand, thought otherwise,” said 
Dumbledore. “Lord Voldemort has finally realized the 
dangerous access to his thoughts and feelings you 
have been enjoying. It appears that he is now 
employing Occlumency against you.” 

Page | 65 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, I’m not complaining,” said Harry, who missed 
neither the disturbing dreams nor the startling 
flashes of insight into Voldemort’s mind. 

They turned a corner, passing a telephone box and a 
bus shelter. Harry looked sideways at Dumbledore 
again. “Professor?” 

“Harry?” 

“Er — where exactly are we?” 

“This, Harry, is the charming village of Budleigh 
Babberton.” 

“And what are we doing here?” 

“Ah yes, of course, I haven’t told you,” said 
Dumbledore. “Well, I have lost count of the number of 
times I have said this in recent years, but we are, 
once again, one member of staff short. We are here to 
persuade an old colleague of mine to come out of 
retirement and return to Hogwarts.” 

“How can I help with that, sir?” 

“Oh, I think we’ll find a use for you,” said Dumbledore 
vaguely. “Left here, Harry.” 

They proceeded up a steep, narrow street lined with 
houses. All the windows were dark. The odd chill that 
had lain over Privet Drive for two weeks persisted here 
too. Thinking of dementors, Harry cast a look over his 
shoulder and grasped his wand reassuringly in his 
pocket. 

“Professor, why couldn’t we just Apparate directly into 
your old colleague’s house?” 



Page | 66 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Because it would be quite as rude as kicking down 
the front door,” said Dumbledore. “Courtesy dictates 
that we offer fellow wizards the opportunity of denying 
us entry. In any case, most Wizarding dwellings are 
magically protected from unwanted Apparators. At 
Hogwarts, for instance — ” 

“ — you can’t Apparate anywhere inside the buildings 
or grounds,” said Harry quickly. “Hermione Granger 
told me.” 

“And she is quite right. We turn left again.” 

The church clock chimed midnight behind them. 

Harry wondered why Dumbledore did not consider it 
rude to call on his old colleague so late, but now that 
conversation had been established, he had more 
pressing questions to ask. 

“Sir, I saw in the Daily Prophet that Fudge has been 
sacked. ...” 

“Correct,” said Dumbledore, now turning up a steep 
side street. “He has been replaced, as I am sure you 
also saw, by Rufus Scrimgeour, who used to be Head 
of the Auror office.” 

“Is he ... Do you think he’s good?” asked Harry. 

“An interesting question,” said Dumbledore. “He is 
able, certainly. A more decisive and forceful 
personality than Cornelius.” 

“Yes, but I meant — ” 

“I know what you meant. Rufus is a man of action 
and, having fought Dark wizards for most of his 
working life, does not underestimate Lord Voldemort.” 



Page | 67 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry waited, but Dumbledore did not say anything 
about the disagreement with Scrimgeour that the 
Daily Prophet had reported, and he did not have the 
nerve to pursue the subject, so he changed it. “And ... 
sir ... I saw about Madam Bones.” 

“Yes,” said Dumbledore quietly. “A terrible loss. She 
was a great witch. Just up here, I think — ouch.” 

He had pointed with his injured hand. 

“Professor, what happened to your — ?” 

“I have no time to explain now,” said Dumbledore. “It 
is a thrilling tale, I wish to do it justice.” 

He smiled at Harry, who understood that he was not 
being snubbed, and that he had permission to keep 
asking questions. 

“Sir — I got a Ministry of Magic leaflet by owl, about 
security measures we should all take against the 
Death Eaters. ...” 

“Yes, I received one myself,” said Dumbledore, still 
smiling. “Did you find it useful?” 

“Not really.” 

“No, I thought not. You have not asked me, for 
instance, what is my favorite flavor of jam, to check 
that I am indeed Professor Dumbledore and not an 
impostor.” 

“I didn’t ...” Harry began, not entirely sure whether he 
was being reprimanded or not. 

“For future reference, Harry, it is raspberry ... 
although of course, if I were a Death Eater, I would 

Page | 68 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




have been sure to research my own jam preferences 
before impersonating myself.” 

“Er ... right,” said Harry. “Well, on that leaflet, it said 
something about Inferi. What exactly are they? The 
leaflet wasn’t very clear.” 

“They are corpses,” said Dumbledore calmly. “Dead 
bodies that have been bewitched to do a Dark 
wizard’s bidding. Inferi have not been seen for a long 
time, however, not since Voldemort was last powerful. 

. . . He killed enough people to make an army of them, 
of course. This is the place, Harry, just here. ...” 

They were nearing a small, neat stone house set in its 
own garden. Harry was too busy digesting the horrible 
idea of Inferi to have much attention left for anything 
else, but as they reached the front gate, Dumbledore 
stopped dead and Harry walked into him. 

“Oh dear. Oh dear, dear, dear.” 

Harry followed his gaze up the carefully tended front 
path and felt his heart sink. The front door was 
hanging off its hinges. 

Dumbledore glanced up and down the street. It 
seemed quite deserted. 

“Wand out and follow me, Harry,” he said quietly. 

He opened the gate and walked swiftly and silently up 
the garden path, Harry at his heels, then pushed the 
front door very slowly, his wand raised and at the 
ready. 

“Lumos.” 



Page | 69 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore ’s wand tip ignited, casting its light up a 
narrow hallway. To the left, another door stood open. 
Holding his illuminated wand aloft, Dumbledore 
walked into the sitting room with Harry right behind 
him. 

A scene of total devastation met their eyes. A 
grandfather clock lay splintered at their feet, its face 
cracked, its pendulum lying a little farther away like a 
dropped sword. A piano was on its side, its keys 
strewn across the floor. The wreckage of a fallen 
chandelier glittered nearby. Cushions lay deflated, 
feathers oozing from slashes in their sides; fragments 
of glass and china lay like powder over everything. 
Dumbledore raised his wand even higher, so that its 
light was thrown upon the walls, where something 
darkly red and glutinous was spattered over the 
wallpaper. Harry’s small intake of breath made 
Dumbledore look around. 

“Not pretty, is it?” he said heavily. “Yes, something 
horrible has happened here.” 

Dumbledore moved carefully into the middle of the 
room, scrutinizing the wreckage at his feet. Harry 
followed, gazing around, half-scared of what he might 
see hidden behind the wreck of the piano or the 
overturned sofa, but there was no sign of a body. 

“Maybe there was a fight and — and they dragged him 
off, Professor?” Harry suggested, trying not to imagine 
how badly wounded a man would have to be to leave 
those stains spattered halfway up the walls. 

“I don’t think so,” said Dumbledore quietly, peering 
behind an overstuffed armchair lying on its side. 

“You mean he’s — ?” 



Page | 70 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Still here somewhere? Yes.” 



And without warning, Dumbledore swooped, plunging 
the tip of his wand into the seat of the overstuffed 
armchair, which yelled, “Ouch!” 

“Good evening, Horace,” said Dumbledore, 
straightening up again. 

Harry’s jaw dropped. Where a split second before 
there had been an armchair, there now crouched an 
enormously fat, bald, old man who was massaging his 
lower belly and squinting up at Dumbledore with an 
aggrieved and watery eye. 

“There was no need to stick the wand in that hard,” 
he said gruffly, clambering to his feet. “It hurt.” 

The wandlight sparkled on his shiny pate, his 
prominent eyes, his enormous, silver, walruslike 
mustache, and the highly polished buttons on the 
maroon velvet jacket he was wearing over a pair of 
lilac silk pajamas. The top of his head barely reached 
Dumbledore ’s chin. 

“What gave it away?” he grunted as he staggered to 
his feet, still rubbing his lower belly. He seemed 
remarkably unabashed for a man who had just been 
discovered pretending to be an armchair. 

“My dear Horace,” said Dumbledore, looking amused, 
“if the Death Eaters really had come to call, the Dark 
Mark would have been set over the house.” 

The wizard clapped a pudgy hand to his vast 
forehead. 

“The Dark Mark,” he muttered. “Knew there was 
something ... ah well. Wouldn’t have had time 

Page | 71 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




anyway, I’d only just put the finishing touches to my 
upholstery when you entered the room.” 

He heaved a great sigh that made the ends of his 
mustache flutter. 

“Would you like my assistance clearing up?” asked 
Dumbledore politely. 

“Please,” said the other. 

They stood back to back, the tall thin wizard and the 
short round one, and waved their wands in one 
identical sweeping motion. 

The furniture flew back to its original places; 
ornaments reformed in midair, feathers zoomed into 
their cushions; torn books repaired themselves as 
they landed upon their shelves; oil lanterns soared 
onto side tables and reignited; a vast collection of 
splintered silver picture frames flew glittering across 
the room and alighted, whole and untarnished, upon 
a desk; rips, cracks, and holes healed everywhere, 
and the walls wiped themselves clean. 

“What kind of blood was that, incidentally?” asked 
Dumbledore loudly over the chiming of the newly 
unsmashed grandfather clock. 

“On the walls? Dragon,” shouted the wizard called 
Horace, as, with a deafening grinding and tinkling, 
the chandelier screwed itself back into the ceiling. 

There was a final plunk from the piano, and silence. 

“Yes, dragon,” repeated the wizard conversationally. 
“My last bottle, and prices are sky-high at the 
moment. Still, it might be reusable.” 



Page | 72 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




He stumped over to a small crystal bottle standing on 
top of a sideboard and held it up to the light, 
examining the thick liquid within. 

“Hmm. Bit dusty.” 

He set the bottle back on the sideboard and sighed. It 
was then that his gaze fell upon Harry. 

“Oho,” he said, his large round eyes flying to Harry’s 
forehead and the lightning-shaped scar it bore. “Ohol” 

“This,” said Dumbledore, moving forward to make the 
introduction, “is Harry Potter. Harry, this is an old 
friend and colleague of mine, Horace Slughorn.” 

Slughorn turned on Dumbledore, his expression 
shrewd. “So that’s how you thought you’d persuade 
me, is it? Well, the answer’s no, Albus.” 

He pushed past Harry, his face turned resolutely 
away with the air of a man trying to resist temptation. 

“I suppose we can have a drink, at least?” asked 
Dumbledore. “For old time’s sake?” 

Slughorn hesitated. 

“All right then, one drink,” he said ungraciously. 

Dumbledore smiled at Harry and directed him toward 
a chair not unlike the one that Slughorn had so 
recently impersonated, which stood right beside the 
newly burning fire and a brightly glowing oil lamp. 
Harry took the seat with the distinct impression that 
Dumbledore, for some reason, wanted to keep him as 
visible as possible. Certainly when Slughorn, who had 
been busy with decanters and glasses, turned to face 
the room again, his eyes fell immediately upon Harry. 
Page | 73 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Hmpf,” he said, looking away quickly as though 
frightened of hurting his eyes. “Here — ” He gave a 
drink to Dumbledore, who had sat down without 
invitation, thrust the tray at Harry, and then sank 
into the cushions of the repaired sofa and a 
disgruntled silence. His legs were so short they did 
not touch the floor. 

“Well, how have you been keeping, Horace?” 
Dumbledore asked. 

“Not so well,” said Slughorn at once. “Weak chest. 
Wheezy. Rheumatism too. Can’t move like I used to. 
Well, that’s to be expected. Old age. Fatigue.” 

“And yet you must have moved fairly quickly to 
prepare such a welcome for us at such short notice,” 
said Dumbledore. “You can’t have had more than 
three minutes’ warning?” 

Slughorn said, half irritably, half proudly, “Two. 

Didn’t hear my Intruder Charm go off, I was taking a 
bath. Still,” he added sternly, seeming to pull himself 
back together again, “the fact remains that I’m an old 
man, Albus. A tired old man who’s earned the right to 
a quiet life and a few creature comforts.” 

He certainly had those, thought Harry, looking 
around the room. It was stuffy and cluttered, yet 
nobody could say it was uncomfortable; there were 
soft chairs and footstools, drinks and books, boxes of 
chocolates and plump cushions. If Harry had not 
known who lived there, he would have guessed at a 
rich, fussy old lady. 

“You’re not yet as old as I am, Horace,” said 
Dumbledore. 



Page | 74 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, maybe you ought to think about retirement 
yourself,” said Slughorn bluntly. His pale gooseberry 
eyes had found Dumbledore ’s injured hand. 

“Reactions not what they were, I see.” 

“You’re quite right,” said Dumbledore serenely, 
shaking back his sleeve to reveal the tips of those 
burned and blackened fingers; the sight of them made 
the back of Harry’s neck prickle unpleasantly. “I am 
undoubtedly slower than I was. But on the other 
hand ...” 

He shrugged and spread his hands wide, as though to 
say that age had its compensations, and Harry 
noticed a ring on his uninjured hand that he had 
never seen Dumbledore wear before: It was large, 
rather clumsily made of what looked like gold, and 
was set with a heavy black stone that had cracked 
down the middle. Slughorn’s eyes lingered for a 
moment on the ring too, and Harry saw a tiny frown 
momentarily crease his wide forehead. 

“So, all these precautions against intruders, Horace 
... are they for the Death Eaters’ benefit, or mine?” 
asked Dumbledore. 

“What would the Death Eaters want with a poor 
broken-down old buffer like me?” demanded 
Slughorn. 

“I imagine that they would want you to turn your 
considerable talents to coercion, torture, and 
murder,” said Dumbledore. “Are you really telling me 
that they haven’t come recruiting yet?” 

Slughorn eyed Dumbledore balefully for a moment, 
then muttered, “I haven’t given them the chance. I’ve 
been on the move for a year. Never stay in one place 
more than a week. Move from Muggle house to 

Page | 75 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Muggle house — the owners of this place are on 
holiday in the Canary Islands — it’s been very 
pleasant, I’ll be sorry to leave. It’s quite easy once you 
know how, one simple Freezing Charm on these 
absurd burglar alarms they use instead of 
Sneakoscopes and make sure the neighbors don’t 
spot you bringing in the piano.” 

“Ingenious,” said Dumbledore. “But it sounds a rather 
tiring existence for a broken-down old buffer in 
search of a quiet life. Now, if you were to return to 
Hogwarts — ” 

“If you’re going to tell me my life would be more 
peaceful at that pestilential school, you can save your 
breath, Albus! I might have been in hiding, but some 
funny rumors have reached me since Dolores 
Umbridge left! If that’s how you treat teachers these 
days — ” 

“Professor Umbridge ran afoul of our centaur herd,” 
said Dumbledore. “I think you, Horace, would have 
known better than to stride into the forest and call a 
horde of angry centaurs ‘filthy half-breeds.’ ” 

“That’s what she did, did she?” said Slughorn. “Idiotic 
woman. Never liked her.” 

Harry chuckled and both Dumbledore and Slughorn 
looked round at him. 

“Sorry,” Harry said hastily. “It’s just — I didn’t like 
her either.” 

Dumbledore stood up rather suddenly. 

“Are you leaving?” asked Slughorn at once, looking 
hopeful. 



Page | 76 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No, I was wondering whether I might use your 
bathroom,” said Dumbledore. 

“Oh,” said Slughorn, clearly disappointed. “Second on 
the left down the hall.” 

Dumbledore strode from the room. Once the door had 
closed behind him, there was silence. After a few 
moments, Slughorn got to his feet but seemed 
uncertain what to do with himself. He shot a furtive 
look at Harry, then crossed to the fire and turned his 
back on it, warming his wide behind. 

“Don’t think I don’t know why he’s brought you,” he 
said abruptly. 

Harry merely looked at Slughorn. Slughorn ’s watery 
eyes slid over Harry’s scar, this time taking in the rest 
of his face. 

“You look very like your father.” 

“Yeah, I’ve been told,” said Harry. 

“Except for your eyes. You’ve got — ” 

“My mother’s eyes, yeah.” Harry had heard it so often 
he found it a bit wearing. 

“Hmpf. Yes, well. You shouldn’t have favorites as a 
teacher, of course, but she was one of mine. Your 
mother,” Slughorn added, in answer to Harry’s 
questioning look. “Lily Evans. One of the brightest I 
ever taught. Vivacious, you know. Charming girl. I 
used to tell her she ought to have been in my House. 
Very cheeky answers I used to get back too.” 

“Which was your House?” 



Page | 77 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I was Head of Slytherin,” said Slughorn. “Oh, now,” 
he went on quickly, seeing the expression on Harry’s 
face and wagging a stubby finger at him, “don’t go 
holding that against me! You’ll be Gryffindor like her, 

I suppose? Yes, it usually goes in families. Not 
always, though. Ever heard of Sirius Black? You must 
have done — been in the papers for the last couple of 
years — died a few weeks ago — ” 

It was as though an invisible hand had twisted 
Harry’s intestines and held them tight. 

“Well, anyway, he was a big pal of your father’s at 
school. The whole Black family had been in my 
House, but Sirius ended up in Gryffindor! Shame — 
he was a talented boy. I got his brother, Regulus, 
when he came along, but I’d have liked the set.” 

He sounded like an enthusiastic collector who had 
been outbid at auction. Apparently lost in memories, 
he gazed at the opposite wall, turning idly on the spot 
to ensure an even heat on his backside. 

“Your mother was Muggle-born, of course. Couldn’t 
believe it when I found out. Thought she must have 
been pure-blood, she was so good.” 

“One of my best friends is Muggle-born,” said Harry, 
“and she’s the best in our year.” 

“Funny how that sometimes happens, isn’t it?” said 
Slughorn. 

“Not really,” said Harry coldly. 

Slughorn looked down at him in surprise. “You 
mustn’t think I’m prejudiced!” he said. “No, no, no! 
Haven’t I just said your mother was one of my all-time 
favorite students? And there was Dirk Cresswell in 

Page | 78 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




the year after her too — now Head of the Goblin 
Liaison Office, of course — another Muggle-born, a 
very gifted student, and still gives me excellent inside 
information on the goings-on at Gringotts!” 

He bounced up and down a little, smiling in a self- 
satisfied way, and pointed at the many glittering 
photograph frames on the dresser, each peopled with 
tiny moving occupants. 

“All ex-students, all signed. You’ll notice Barnabas 
Cuffe, editor of the Daily Prophet, he’s always 
interested to hear my take on the day’s news. And 
Ambrosius Flume, of Honeydukes — a hamper every 
birthday, and all because I was able to give him an 
introduction to Ciceron Harkiss, who gave him his 
first job! And at the back — you’ll see her if you just 
crane your neck — that’s Gwenog Jones, who of 
course captains the Holyhead Harpies. ... People are 
always astonished to hear I’m on first-name terms 
with the Harpies, and free tickets whenever I want 
them!” 

This thought seemed to cheer him up enormously. 

“And all these people know where to find you, to send 
you stuff?” asked Harry, who could not help 
wondering why the Death Eaters had not yet tracked 
down Slughorn if hampers of sweets, Quidditch 
tickets, and visitors craving his advice and opinions 
could find him. 

The smile slid from Slughorn ’s face as quickly as the 
blood from his walls. 

“Of course not,” he said, looking down at Harry. “I 
have been out of touch with everybody for a year.” 



Page | 79 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry had the impression that the words shocked 
Slughorn himself; he looked quite unsettled for a 
moment. Then he shrugged. 

“Still . . . the prudent wizard keeps his head down in 
such times. All very well for Dumbledore to talk, but 
taking up a post at Hogwarts just now would be 
tantamount to declaring my public allegiance to the 
Order of the Phoenix! And while I’m sure they’re very 
admirable and brave and all the rest of it, I don’t 
personally fancy the mortality rate — ” 

“You don’t have to join the Order to teach at 
Hogwarts,” said Harry, who could not quite keep a 
note of derision out of his voice: It was hard to 
sympathize with Slughorn ’s cosseted existence when 
he remembered Sirius, crouching in a cave and living 
on rats. “Most of the teachers aren’t in it, and none of 
them has ever been killed — well, unless you count 
Quirrell, and he got what he deserved seeing as he 
was working with Voldemort.” 

Harry had been sure Slughorn would be one of those 
wizards who could not bear to hear Voldemort’s name 
spoken aloud, and was not disappointed: Slughorn 
gave a shudder and a squawk of protest, which Harry 
ignored. 

“I reckon the staff are safer than most people while 
Dumbledore ’s headmaster; he’s supposed to be the 
only one Voldemort ever feared, isn’t he?” Harry went 
on. 

Slughorn gazed into space for a moment or two: He 
seemed to be thinking over Harry’s words. 

“Well, yes, it is true that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named 
has never sought a fight with Dumbledore,” he 
muttered grudgingly. “And I suppose one could argue 

Page | 80 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




that as I have not joined the Death Eaters, He-Who- 
Must-Not-Be-Named can hardly count me a friend ... 
in which case, I might well be safer a little closer to 
Albus. ... I cannot pretend that Amelia Bones’s death 
did not shake me. ... If she, with all her Ministry 
contacts and protection ...” 

Dumbledore reentered the room and Slughorn 
jumped as though he had forgotten he was in the 
house. 

“Oh, there you are, Albus,” he said. “You’ve been a 
very long time. Upset stomach?” 

“No, I was merely reading the Muggle magazines,” 
said Dumbledore. “I do love knitting patterns. Well, 
Harry, we have trespassed upon Horace’s hospitality 
quite long enough; I think it is time for us to leave.” 

Not at all reluctant to obey, Harry jumped to his feet. 
Slughorn seemed taken aback. 

“You’re leaving?” 

“Yes, indeed. I think I know a lost cause when I see 
one.” 

“Lost... ?” 

Slughorn seemed agitated. He twiddled his fat 
thumbs and fidgeted as he watched Dumbledore 
fasten his traveling cloak, and Harry zip up his jacket. 

“Well, I’m sorry you don’t want the job, Horace,” said 
Dumbledore, raising his uninjured hand in a farewell 
salute. “Hogwarts would have been glad to see you 
back again. Our greatly increased security 
notwithstanding, you will always be welcome to visit, 
should you wish to.” 

Page | 81 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




“Yes ... well ... very gracious ... as I say ...” 



“Good-bye, then.” 

“Bye,” said Harry. 

They were at the front door when there was a shout 
from behind them. 

“All right, all right, 111 do it!” 

Dumbledore turned to see Slughorn standing 
breathless in the doorway to the sitting room. 

“You will come out of retirement?” 

“Yes, yes,” said Slughorn impatiently. “I must be mad, 
but yes.” 

“Wonderful,” said Dumbledore, beaming. “Then, 
Horace, we shall see you on the first of September.” 

“Yes, I daresay you will,” grunted Slughorn. 

As they set off down the garden path, Slughorn ’s voice 
floated after them, “111 want a pay rise, Dumbledore!” 

Dumbledore chuckled. The garden gate swung shut 
behind them, and they set off back down the hill 
through the dark and the swirling mist. 

“Well done, Harry,” said Dumbledore. 

“I didn’t do anything,” said Harry in surprise. 

“Oh yes you did. You showed Horace exactly how 
much he stands to gain by returning to Hogwarts. Did 
you like him?” 



Page | 82 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Er ...” 



Harry wasn’t sure whether he liked Slughorn or not. 
He supposed he had been pleasant in his way, but he 
had also seemed vain and, whatever he said to the 
contrary, much too surprised that a Muggle-born 
should make a good witch. 

“Horace,” said Dumbledore, relieving Harry of the 
responsibility to say any of this, “likes his comfort. He 
also likes the company of the famous, the successful, 
and the powerful. He enjoys the feeling that he 
influences these people. He has never wanted to 
occupy the throne himself; he prefers the backseat — 
more room to spread out, you see. He used to 
handpick favorites at Hogwarts, sometimes for their 
ambition or their brains, sometimes for their charm 
or their talent, and he had an uncanny knack for 
choosing those who would go on to become 
outstanding in their various fields. Horace formed a 
kind of club of his favorites with himself at the center, 
making introductions, forging useful contacts 
between members, and always reaping some kind of 
benefit in return, whether a free box of his favorite 
crystalized pineapple or the chance to recommend the 
next junior member of the Goblin Liaison Office.” 

Harry had a sudden and vivid mental image of a great 
swollen spider, spinning a web around it, twitching a 
thread here and there to bring its large and juicy flies 
a little closer. 

“I tell you all this,” Dumbledore continued, “not to 
turn you against Horace — or, as we must now call 
him, Professor Slughorn — but to put you on your 
guard. He will undoubtedly try to collect you, Harry. 
You would be the jewel of his collection; ‘the Boy Who 
Lived’ ... or, as they call you these days, ‘the Chosen 
One.’” 

Page | 83 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




At these words, a chill that had nothing to do with the 
surrounding mist stole over Harry. He was reminded 
of words he had heard a few weeks ago, words that 
had a horrible and particular meaning to him: Neither 
can live while the other survives . . . 

Dumbledore had stopped walking, level with the 
church they had passed earlier. 

“This will do, Harry. If you will grasp my arm.” 

Braced this time, Harry was ready for the Apparition, 
but still found it unpleasant. When the pressure 
disappeared and he found himself able to breathe 
again, he was standing in a country lane beside 
Dumbledore and looking ahead to the crooked 
silhouette of his second favorite building in the world: 
the Burrow. In spite of the feeling of dread that had 
just swept through him, his spirits could not help but 
lift at the sight of it. Ron was in there ... and so was 
Mrs. Weasley, who could cook better than anyone he 
knew. ... 

“If you don’t mind, Harry,” said Dumbledore, as they 
passed through the gate, “I’d like a few words with 
you before we part. In private. Perhaps in here?” 

Dumbledore pointed toward a run-down stone 
outhouse where the Weasleys kept their broomsticks. 
A little puzzled, Harry followed Dumbledore through 
the creaking door into a space a little smaller than the 
average cupboard. Dumbledore illuminated the tip of 
his wand, so that it glowed like a torch, and smiled 
down at Harry. 

“I hope you will forgive me for mentioning it, Harry, 
but I am pleased and a little proud at how well you 
seem to be coping after everything that happened at 



Page | 84 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




the Ministry. Permit me to say that I think Sirius 
would have been proud of you.” 

Harry swallowed; his voice seemed to have deserted 
him. He did not think he could stand to discuss 
Sirius; it had been painful enough to hear Uncle 
Vernon say “His godfather’s dead?” and even worse to 
hear Sirius’s name thrown out casually by Slughorn. 

“It was cruel,” said Dumbledore softly, “that you and 
Sirius had such a short time together. A brutal 
ending to what should have been a long and happy 
relationship.” 

Harry nodded, his eyes fixed resolutely on the spider 
now climbing Dumbledore’s hat. He could tell that 
Dumbledore understood, that he might even suspect 
that until his letter arrived, Harry had spent nearly all 
his time at the Dursleys’ lying on his bed, refusing 
meals, and staring at the misted window, full of the 
chill emptiness that he had come to associate with 
dementors. 

“It’s just hard,” Harry said finally, in a low voice, “to 
realize he won’t write to me again.” 

His eyes burned suddenly and he blinked. He felt 
stupid for admitting it, but the fact that he had had 
someone outside Hogwarts who cared what happened 
to him, almost like a parent, had been one of the best 
things about discovering his godfather . . . and now the 
post owls would never bring him that comfort again. 



“Sirius represented much to you that you had never 
known before,” said Dumbledore gently. “Naturally, 
the loss is devastating. ...” 



Page | 85 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“But while I was at the Dursleys’ ...” interrupted 
Harry, his voice growing stronger, “I realized I can’t 
shut myself away or — or crack up. Sirius wouldn’t 
have wanted that, would he? And anyway, life’s too 
short. ... Look at Madam Bones, look at Emmeline 
Vance. ... It could be me next, couldn’t it? But if it is,” 
he said fiercely, now looking straight into 
Dumbledore’s blue eyes gleaming in the wandlight, 

“I’ll make sure I take as many Death Eaters with me 
as I can, and Voldemort too if I can manage it.” 

“Spoken both like your mother and father’s son and 
Sirius’s true godson!” said Dumbledore, with an 
approving pat on Harry’s back. “I take my hat off to 
you — or I would, if I were not afraid of showering you 
in spiders. 

“And now, Harry, on a closely related subject ... I 
gather that you have been taking the Daily Prophet 
over the last two weeks?” 

“Yes,” said Harry, and his heart beat a little faster. 

“Then you will have seen that there have been not so 
much leaks as floods concerning your adventure in 
the Hall of Prophecy?” 

“Yes,” said Harry again. “And now everyone knows 
that I’m the one — ” 

“No, they do not,” interrupted Dumbledore. “There are 
only two people in the whole world who know the full 
contents of the prophecy made about you and Lord 
Voldemort, and they are both standing in this smelly, 
spidery broom shed. It is true, however, that many 
have guessed, correctly, that Voldemort sent his 
Death Eaters to steal a prophecy, and that the 
prophecy concerned you. 



Page | 86 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Now, I think I am correct in saying that you have not 
told anybody that you know what the prophecy said?” 

“No,” said Harry. 

“A wise decision, on the whole,” said Dumbledore. 
“Although I think you ought to relax it in favor of your 
friends, Mr. Ronald Weasley and Miss Hermione 
Granger. Yes,” he continued, when Harry looked 
startled, “I think they ought to know. You do them a 
disservice by not confiding something this important 
to them.” 

“I didn’t want — ” 

“ — to worry or frighten them?” said Dumbledore, 
surveying Harry over the top of his half-moon 
spectacles. “Or perhaps, to confess that you yourself 
are worried and frightened? You need your friends, 
Harry. As you so rightly said, Sirius would not have 
wanted you to shut yourself away.” 

Harry said nothing, but Dumbledore did not seem to 
require an answer. He continued, “On a different, 
though related, subject, it is my wish that you take 
private lessons with me this year.” 

“Private — with you?” said Harry, surprised out of his 
preoccupied silence. 

“Yes. I think it is time that I took a greater hand in 
your education.” 

“What will you be teaching me, sir?” 

“Oh, a little of this, a little of that,” said Dumbledore 
airily. 



Page | 87 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry waited hopefully, but Dumbledore did not 
elaborate, so he asked something else that had been 
bothering him slightly. 

“If I’m having lessons with you, I won’t have to do 
Occlumency lessons with Snape, will I?” 

“Professor Snape, Harry — and no, you will not.” 

“Good,” said Harry in relief, “because they were a — ” 

He stopped, careful not to say what he really thought. 

“I think the word ‘fiasco’ would be a good one here,” 
said Dumbledore, nodding. 

Harry laughed. 

“Well, that means I won’t see much of Professor 
Snape from now on,” he said, “because he won’t let 
me carry on Potions unless I get ‘Outstanding’ in my 
O.W.L., which I know I haven’t.” 

“Don’t count your owls before they are delivered,” said 
Dumbledore gravely. “Which, now I think of it, ought 
to be some time later today. Now, two more things, 
Harry, before we part. 

“Firstly, I wish you to keep your Invisibility Cloak with 
you at all times from this moment onward. Even 
within Hogwarts itself. Just in case, you understand 
me?” 

Harry nodded. 

“And lastly, while you stay here, the Burrow has been 
given the highest security the Ministry of Magic can 
provide. These measures have caused a certain 
amount of inconvenience to Arthur and Molly — all 

Page | 88 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




their post, for instance, is being searched at the 
Ministry before being sent on. They do not mind in 
the slightest, for their only concern is your safety. 
However, it would be poor repayment if you risked 
your neck while staying with them.” 

“I understand,” said Harry quickly. 

“Very well, then,” said Dumbledore, pushing open the 
broom shed door and stepping out into the yard. “I 
see a light in the kitchen. Let us not deprive Molly 
any longer of the chance to deplore how thin you are.” 



Page | 89 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 







AN EXCESS OF PHLEGM 

Harry and Dumbledore approached the back door of 
the Burrow, which was surrounded by the familiar 
litter of old Wellington boots and rusty cauldrons; 
Harry could hear the soft clucking of sleepy chickens 
coming from a distant shed. Dumbledore knocked 
three times and Harry saw sudden movement behind 
the kitchen window. 

“Who’s there?” said a nervous voice he recognized as 
Mrs. Weasley’s. “Declare yourself!” 

“It is I, Dumbledore, bringing Harry.” 

The door opened at once. There stood Mrs. Weasley, 
short, plump, and wearing an old green dressing 
gown. 

“Harry, dear! Gracious, Albus, you gave me a fright, 
you said not to expect you before morning!” 

“We were lucky,” said Dumbledore, ushering Harry 
over the threshold. “Slughorn proved much more 

Page | 90 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



persuadable than I had expected. Harry’s doing, of 
course. Ah, hello, Nymphadora!” 

Harry looked around and saw that Mrs. Weasley was 
not alone, despite the lateness of the hour. A young 
witch with a pale, heart-shaped face and mousy 
brown hair was sitting at the table clutching a large 
mug between her hands. 

“Hello, Professor,” she said. “Wotcher, Harry.” 

“Hi, Tonks.” 

Harry thought she looked drawn, even ill, and there 
was something forced in her smile. Certainly her 
appearance was less colorful than usual without her 
customary shade of bubble-gum-pink hair. 

“I’d better be off,” she said quickly, standing up and 
pulling her cloak around her shoulders. “Thanks for 
the tea and sympathy, Molly.” 

“Please don’t leave on my account,” said Dumbledore 
courteously, “I cannot stay, I have urgent matters to 
discuss with Rufus Scrimgeour.” 

“No, no, I need to get going,” said Tonks, not meeting 
Dumbledore’s eyes. “ ’Night — ” 

“Dear, why not come to dinner at the weekend, 

Remus and Mad-Eye are coming — ?” 

“No, really, Molly ... thanks anyway ... Good night, 
everyone.” 

Tonks hurried past Dumbledore and Harry into the 
yard; a few paces beyond the doorstep, she turned on 
the spot and vanished into thin air. Harry noticed 
that Mrs. Weasley looked troubled. 

Page | 91 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




“Well, I shall see you at Hogwarts, Harry,” said 
Dumbledore. “Take care of yourself. Molly, your 
servant.” 

He made Mrs. Weasley a bow and followed Tonks, 
vanishing at precisely the same spot. Mrs. Weasley 
closed the door on the empty yard and then steered 
Harry by the shoulders into the full glow of the 
lantern on the table to examine his appearance. 

“You’re like Ron,” she sighed, looking him up and 
down. “Both of you look as though you’ve had 
Stretching Jinxes put on you. I swear Ron’s grown 
four inches since I last bought him school robes. Are 
you hungry, Harry?” 

“Yeah, I am,” said Harry, suddenly realizing just how 
hungry he was. 

“Sit down, dear, I’ll knock something up.” 

As Harry sat down, a furry ginger cat with a squashed 
face jumped onto his knees and settled there, 
purring. 

“So Hermione’s here?” he asked happily as he tickled 
Crookshanks behind the ears. 

“Oh yes, she arrived the day before yesterday,” said 
Mrs. Weasley, rapping a large iron pot with her wand. 
It bounced onto the stove with a loud clang and began 
to bubble at once. “Everyone’s in bed, of course, we 
didn’t expect you for hours. Here you are — ” 

She tapped the pot again; it rose into the air, flew 
toward Harry, and tipped over; Mrs. Weasley slid a 
bowl neatly beneath it just in time to catch the 
stream of thick, steaming onion soup. 



Page | 92 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Bread, dear?” 



“Thanks, Mrs. Weasley.” 

She waved her wand over her shoulder; a loaf of 
bread and a knife soared gracefully onto the table; as 
the loaf sliced itself and the soup pot dropped back 
onto the stove, Mrs. Weasley sat down opposite him. 

“So you persuaded Horace Slughorn to take the job?” 

Harry nodded, his mouth so full of hot soup that he 
could not speak. 

“He taught Arthur and me,” said Mrs. Weasley. “He 
was at Hogwarts for ages, started around the same 
time as Dumbledore, I think. Did you like him?” 

His mouth now full of bread, Harry shrugged and 
gave a noncommittal jerk of the head. 

“I know what you mean,” said Mrs. Weasley, nodding 
wisely. “Of course he can be charming when he wants 
to be, but Arthur’s never liked him much. The 
Ministry’s littered with Slughorn’s old favorites, he 
was always good at giving leg ups, but he never had 
much time for Arthur — didn’t seem to think he was 
enough of a highflier. Well, that just shows you, even 
Slughorn makes mistakes. I don’t know whether 
Ron’s told you in any of his letters — it’s only just 
happened — but Arthur’s been promoted!” 

It could not have been clearer that Mrs. Weasley had 
been bursting to say this. 

Harry swallowed a large amount of very hot soup and 
thought he could feel his throat blistering. “That’s 
great!” he gasped. 



Page | 93 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You are sweet,” beamed Mrs. Weasley, possibly 
taking his watering eyes for emotion at the news. 

“Yes, Rufus Scrimgeour has set up several new offices 
in response to the present situation, and Arthur’s 
heading the Office for the Detection and Confiscation 
of Counterfeit Defensive Spells and Protective Objects. 
It’s a big job, he’s got ten people reporting to him 
now!” 

“What exactly — ?” 

“Well, you see, in all the panic about You-Know-Who, 
odd things have been cropping up for sale 
everywhere, things that are supposed to guard 
against You-Know-Who and the Death Eaters. You 
can imagine the kind of thing — so-called protective 
potions that are really gravy with a bit of bubotuber 
pus added, or instructions for defensive jinxes that 
actually make your ears fall off. ... Well, in the main 
the perpetrators are just people like Mundungus 
Fletcher, who’ve never done an honest day’s work in 
their lives and are taking advantage of how frightened 
everybody is, but every now and then something 
really nasty turns up. The other day Arthur 
confiscated a box of cursed Sneakoscopes that were 
almost certainly planted by a Death Eater. So you 
see, it’s a very important job, and I tell him it’s just 
silly to miss dealing with spark plugs and toasters 
and all the rest of that Muggle rubbish.” Mrs. Weasley 
ended her speech with a stern look, as if it had been 
Harry suggesting that it was natural to miss spark 
plugs. 

“Is Mr. Weasley still at work?” Harry asked. 

“Yes, he is. As a matter of fact, he’s a tiny bit late. ... 
He said he’d be back around midnight. ...” 



Page | 94 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




She turned to look at a large clock that was perched 
awkwardly on top of a pile of sheets in the washing 
basket at the end of the table. Harry recognized it at 
once: It had nine hands, each inscribed with the 
name of a family member, and usually hung on the 
Weasleys’ sitting room wall, though its current 
position suggested that Mrs. Weasley had taken to 
carrying it around the house with her. Every single 
one of its nine hands was now pointing at “mortal 
peril.” 

“It’s been like that for a while now,” said Mrs. 

Weasley, in an unconvincingly casual voice, “ever 
since You-Know-Who came back into the open. I 
suppose everybody’s in mortal danger now. ... I don’t 
think it can be just our family ... but I don’t know 
anyone else who’s got a clock like this, so I can’t 
check. Oh!” 

With a sudden exclamation she pointed at the clock’s 
face. Mr. Weasley’s hand had switched to “traveling.” 

“He’s coming!” 

And sure enough, a moment later there was a knock 
on the back door. Mrs. Weasley jumped up and 
hurried to it; with one hand on the doorknob and her 
face pressed against the wood she called softly, 
“Arthur, is that you?” 

“Yes,” came Mr. Weasley’s weary voice. “But I would 
say that even if I were a Death Eater, dear. Ask the 
question!” 

“Oh, honestly ...” 

“Molly!” 

“All right, all right . . . What is your dearest ambition?” 

Page | 95 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“To find out how airplanes stay up.” 

Mrs. Weasley nodded and turned the doorknob, but 
apparently Mr. Weasley was holding tight to it on the 
other side, because the door remained firmly shut. 

“Molly! I’ve got to ask you your question first!” 

“Arthur, really, this is just silly. ...” 

“What do you like me to call you when we’re alone 
together?” 

Even by the dim light of the lantern Harry could tell 
that Mrs. Weasley had turned bright red; he himself 
felt suddenly warm around the ears and neck, and 
hastily gulped soup, clattering his spoon as loudly as 
he could against the bowl. 

“Mollywobbles,” whispered a mortified Mrs. Weasley 
into the crack at the edge of the door. 

“Correct,” said Mr. Weasley. “Now you can let me in.” 

Mrs. Weasley opened the door to reveal her husband, 
a thin, balding, red-haired wizard wearing horn- 
rimmed spectacles and a long and dusty traveling 
cloak. 

“I still don’t see why we have to go through that every 
time you come home,” said Mrs. Weasley, still pink in 
the face as she helped her husband out of his cloak. 

“I mean, a Death Eater might have forced the answer 
out of you before impersonating you!” 

“I know, dear, but it’s Ministry procedure, and I have 
to set an example. Something smells good — onion 
soup?” 



Page | 96 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Mr. Weasley turned hopefully in the direction of the 
table. 

“Harry! We didn’t expect you until morning!” 

They shook hands, and Mr. Weasley dropped into the 
chair beside Harry as Mrs. Weasley set a bowl of soup 
in front of him too. 

“Thanks, Molly. It’s been a tough night. Some idiot’s 
started selling Metamorph-Medals. Just sling them 
around your neck and you’ll be able to change your 
appearance at will. A hundred thousand disguises, all 
for ten Galleons!” 

“And what really happens when you put them on?” 

“Mostly you just turn a fairly unpleasant orange color, 
but a couple of people have also sprouted tentaclelike 
warts all over their bodies. As if St. Mungo’s didn’t 
have enough to do already!” 

“It sounds like the sort of thing Fred and George 
would find funny,” said Mrs. Weasley hesitantly. “Are 
you sure — ?” 

“Of course I am!” said Mr. Weasley. “The boys 
wouldn’t do anything like that now, not when people 
are desperate for protection!” 

“So is that why you’re late, Metamorph-Medals?” 

“No, we got wind of a nasty backfiring jinx down in 
Elephant and Castle, but luckily the Magical Law 
Enforcement Squad had sorted it out by the time we 
got there. ...” 

Harry stifled a yawn behind his hand. 



Page | 97 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Bed,” said an undeceived Mrs. Weasley at once. “I’ve 
got Fred and George’s room all ready for you, you’ll 
have it to yourself.” 

“Why, where are they?” 

“Oh, they’re in Diagon Alley, sleeping in the little flat 
over their joke shop as they’re so busy,” said Mrs. 
Weasley. “I must say, I didn’t approve at first, but 
they do seem to have a bit of a flair for business! 

Come on, dear, your trunk’s already up there.” 

“ ’Night, Mr. Weasley,” said Harry, pushing back his 
chair. Crookshanks leapt lightly from his lap and 
slunk out of the room. 

“G’night, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley. 

Harry saw Mrs. Weasley glance at the clock in the 
washing basket as they left the kitchen. All the hands 
were once again at “mortal peril.” 

Fred and George’s bedroom was on the second floor. 
Mrs. Weasley pointed her wand at a lamp on the 
bedside table and it ignited at once, bathing the room 
in a pleasant golden glow. Though a large vase of 
flowers had been placed on a desk in front of the 
small window, their perfume could not disguise the 
lingering smell of what Harry thought was 
gunpowder. A considerable amount of floor space was 
devoted to a vast number of unmarked, sealed 
cardboard boxes, amongst which stood Harry’s school 
trunk. The room looked as though it was being used 
as a temporary warehouse. 

Hedwig hooted happily at Harry from her perch on top 
of a large wardrobe, then took off through the 
window; Harry knew she had been waiting to see him 
before going hunting. Harry bade Mrs. Weasley good 

Page | 98 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




night, put on pajamas, and got into one of the beds. 
There was something hard inside the pillowcase. He 
groped inside it and pulled out a sticky purple-and- 
orange sweet, which he recognized as a Puking 
Pastille. Smiling to himself, he rolled over and was 
instantly asleep. 

Seconds later, or so it seemed to Harry, he was 
awakened by what sounded like cannon fire as the 
door burst open. Sitting bolt upright, he heard the 
rasp of the curtains being pulled back: The dazzling 
sunlight seemed to poke him hard in both eyes. 
Shielding them with one hand, he groped hopelessly 
for his glasses with the other. 

“Wuzzgoinon?” 

“We didn’t know you were here already!” said a loud 
and excited voice, and he received a sharp blow to the 
top of the head. 

“Ron, don’t hit him!” said a girl’s voice reproachfully. 

Harry’s hand found his glasses and he shoved them 
on, though the light was so bright he could hardly see 
anyway. A long, looming shadow quivered in front of 
him for a moment; he blinked and Ron Weasley came 
into focus, grinning down at him. 

“All right?” 

“Never been better,” said Harry, rubbing the top of his 
head and slumping back onto his pillows. “You?” 

“Not bad,” said Ron, pulling over a cardboard box and 
sitting on it. “When did you get here? Mum’s only just 
told us!” 

“About one o’clock this morning.” 

Page | 99 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




“Were the Muggles all right? Did they treat you okay?” 

“Same as usual,” said Harry, as Hermione perched 
herself on the edge of his bed, “they didn’t talk to me 
much, but I like it better that way. How’re you, 
Hermione?” 

“Oh, I’m fine,” said Hermione, who was scrutinizing 
Harry as though he was sickening for something. He 
thought he knew what was behind this, and as he 
had no wish to discuss Sirius’s death or any other 
miserable subject at the moment, he said, “What’s the 
time? Have I missed breakfast?” 

“Don’t worry about that, Mum’s bringing you up a 
tray; she reckons you look underfed,” said Ron, 
rolling his eyes. “So, what’s been going on?” 

“Nothing much, I’ve just been stuck at my aunt and 
uncle’s, haven’t I?” 

“Come off it!” said Ron. “You’ve been off with 
Dumbledore!” 

“It wasn’t that exciting. He just wanted me to help 
him persuade this old teacher to come out of 
retirement. His name’s Horace Slughorn.” 

“Oh,” said Ron, looking disappointed. “We thought — ” 

Hermione flashed a warning look at Ron, and Ron 
changed tack at top speed. 

“ — we thought it’d be something like that.” 

“You did?” said Harry, amused. 



Page | 100 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah ... yeah, now Umbridge has left, obviously we 
need a new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher, 
don’t we? So, er, what’s he like?” 

“He looks a bit like a walrus, and he used to be Head 
of Slytherin,” said Harry. “Something wrong, 
Hermione?” 

She was watching him as though expecting strange 
symptoms to manifest themselves at any moment. 

She rearranged her features hastily in an 
unconvincing smile. 

“No, of course not! So, um, did Slughorn seem like 
he’ll be a good teacher?” 

“Dunno,” said Harry. “He can’t be worse than 
Umbridge, can he?” 

“I know someone who’s worse than Umbridge,” said a 
voice from the doorway. Ron’s younger sister slouched 
into the room, looking irritable. “Hi, Harry.” 

“What’s up with you?” Ron asked. 

“It’s her,” said Ginny, plonking herself down on 
Harry’s bed. “She’s driving me mad.” 

“What’s she done now?” asked Hermione 
sympathetically. 

“It’s the way she talks to me — you’d think I was 
about three!” 

“I know,” said Hermione, dropping her voice. “She’s so 
full of herself.” 

Harry was astonished to hear Hermione talking about 
Mrs. Weasley like this and could not blame Ron for 

Page | 101 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




saying angrily, “Can’t you two lay off her for five 
seconds?” 

“Oh, that’s right, defend her,” snapped Ginny. “We all 
know you can’t get enough of her.” 

This seemed an odd comment to make about Ron’s 
mother. Starting to feel that he was missing 
something, Harry said, “Who are you — ?” 

But his question was answered before he could finish 
it. The bedroom door flew open again, and Harry 
instinctively yanked the bedcovers up to his chin so 
hard that Hermione and Ginny slid off the bed onto 
the floor. 

A young woman was standing in the doorway, a 
woman of such breathtaking beauty that the room 
seemed to have become strangely airless. She was tall 
and willowy with long blonde hair and appeared to 
emanate a faint, silvery glow. To complete this vision 
of perfection, she was carrying a heavily laden 
breakfast tray. 

“ ’Arry,” she said in a throaty voice. “Eet ’as been too 
long!” 

As she swept over the threshold toward him, Mrs. 
Weasley was revealed, bobbing along in her wake, 
looking rather cross. 

“There was no need to bring up the tray, I was just 
about to do it myself!” 

“Eet was no trouble,” said Fleur Delacour, setting the 
tray across Harry’s knees and then swooping to kiss 
him on each cheek: He felt the places where her 
mouth had touched him burn. “I ’ave been longing to 
see ’im. You remember my seester, Gabrielle? She 
Page | 102 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




never stops talking about ’Ariy Potter. She will be 
delighted to see you again.” 



“Oh ... is she here too?” Harry croaked. 

“No, no, silly boy,” said Fleur with a tinkling laugh, “I 
mean next summer, when we — but do you not 
know?” 

Her great blue eyes widened and she looked 
reproachfully at Mrs. Weasley, who said, “We hadn’t 
got around to telling him yet.” 

Fleur turned back to Harry, swinging her silvery sheet 
of hair so that it whipped Mrs. Weasley across the 
face. 

“Bill and I are going to be married!” 

“Oh,” said Harry blankly. He could not help noticing 
how Mrs. Weasley, Hermione, and Ginny were all 
determinedly avoiding one another’s gaze. “Wow. Er 
— congratulations!” 

She swooped down upon him and kissed him again. 

“Bill is very busy at ze moment, working very ’ard, 
and I only work part-time at Gringotts for my 
Eenglish, so he brought me ’ere for a few days to get 
to know ’is family properly. I was so pleased to ’ear 
you would be coming — zere isn’t much to do ’ere, 
unless you like cooking and chickens! Well — enjoy 
your breakfast, ’Arry!” 

With these words she turned gracefully and seemed to 
float out of the room, closing the door quietly behind 
her. 

Mrs. Weasley made a noise that sounded like “tchah!” 

Page | 103 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Mum hates her,” said Ginny quietly. 

“I do not hate her!” said Mrs. Weasley in a cross 
whisper. “I just think they’ve hurried into this 
engagement, that’s all!” 

“They’ve known each other a year,” said Ron, who 
looked oddly groggy and was staring at the closed 
door. 

“Well, that’s not very long! I know why it’s happened, 
of course. It’s all this uncertainty with You-Know-Who 
coming back, people think they might be dead 
tomorrow, so they’re rushing all sorts of decisions 
they’d normally take time over. It was the same last 
time he was powerful, people eloping left, right, and 
center — ” 

“Including you and Dad,” said Ginny slyly. 

“Yes, well, your father and I were made for each other, 
what was the point in waiting?” said Mrs. Weasley. 
“Whereas Bill and Fleur . . . well . . . what have they 
really got in common? He’s a hardworking, down-to- 
earth sort of person, whereas she’s — ” 

“A cow,” said Ginny, nodding. “But Bill’s not that 
down-to-earth. He’s a Curse-Breaker, isn’t he, he 
likes a bit of adventure, a bit of glamour. ... I expect 
that’s why he’s gone for Phlegm.” 

“Stop calling her that, Ginny,” said Mrs. Weasley 
sharply, as Harry and Hermione laughed. “Well, I’d 
better get on. ... Eat your eggs while they’re warm, 
Harry.” 

Looking careworn, she left the room. Ron still seemed 
slightly punch-drunk; he was shaking his head 



Page | 104 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




experimentally like a dog trying to rid its ears of 
water. 

“Don’t you get used to her if she’s staying in the same 
house?” Harry asked. 

“Well, you do,” said Ron, “but if she jumps out at you 
unexpectedly, like then ...” 

“It’s pathetic,” said Hermione furiously, striding away 
from Ron as far as she could go and turning to face 
him with her arms folded once she had reached the 
wall. 

“You don’t really want her around forever?” Ginny 
asked Ron incredulously. When he merely shrugged, 
she said, “Well, Mum’s going to put a stop to it if she 
can, I bet you anything.” 

“How’s she going to manage that?” asked Harry. 

“She keeps trying to get Tonks round for dinner. I 
think she’s hoping Bill will fall for Tonks instead. I 
hope he does, I’d much rather have her in the family.” 

“Yeah, that’ll work,” said Ron sarcastically. “Listen, 
no bloke in his right mind’s going to fancy Tonks 
when Fleur’s around. I mean, Tonks is okay-looking 
when she isn’t doing stupid things to her hair and her 
nose, but — ” 

“She’s a damn sight nicer than Phlegm,” said Ginny 

“And she’s more intelligent, she’s an Auror!” said 
Hermione from the corner. 

“Fleur’s not stupid, she was good enough to enter the 
Triwizard Tournament,” said Harry. 



Page | 105 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Not you as well!” said Hermione bitterly. 



“I suppose you like the way Phlegm says ‘’Arry,’ do 
you?” asked Ginny scornfully. 

“No,” said Harry, wishing he hadn’t spoken, “I was 
just saying, Phlegm — I mean, Fleur — ” 

“I’d much rather have Tonks in the family,” said 
Ginny. “At least she’s a laugh.” 

“She hasn’t been much of a laugh lately,” said Ron. 
“Every time I’ve seen her she’s looked more like 
Moaning Myrtle.” 

“That’s not fair,” snapped Hermione. “She still hasn’t 
got over what happened . . . you know ... I mean, he 
was her cousin!” 

Harry’s heart sank. They had arrived at Sirius. He 
picked up a fork and began shoveling scrambled eggs 
into his mouth, hoping to deflect any invitation to join 
in this part of the conversation. 

“Tonks and Sirius barely knew each other!” said Ron. 
“Sirius was in Azkaban half her life and before that 
their families never met — ” 

“That’s not the point,” said Hermione. “She thinks it 
was her fault he died!” 

“How does she work that one out?” asked Harry, in 
spite of himself. 

“Well, she was fighting Bellatrix Lestrange, wasn’t 
she? I think she feels that if only she had finished her 
off, Bellatrix couldn’t have killed Sirius.” 

“That’s stupid,” said Ron. 

Page | 106 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s survivor’s guilt,” said Hermione. “I know Lupin’s 
tried to talk her round, but she’s still really down. 
She’s actually having trouble with her 
Metamorphosing! ” 

“With her — ?” 

“She can’t change her appearance like she used to,” 
explained Hermione. “I think her powers must have 
been affected by shock, or something.” 

“I didn’t know that could happen,” said Harry. 

“Nor did I,” said Hermione, “but I suppose if you’re 
really depressed ...” 

The door opened again and Mrs. Weasley popped her 
head in. “Ginny,” she whispered, “come downstairs 
and help me with the lunch.” 

“I’m talking to this lot!” said Ginny, outraged. 

“Now!” said Mrs. Weasley, and withdrew. 

“She only wants me there so she doesn’t have to be 
alone with Phlegm!” said Ginny crossly. She swung 
her long red hair around in a very good imitation of 
Fleur and pranced across the room with her arms 
held aloft like a ballerina. 

“You lot had better come down quickly too,” she said 
as she left. 

Harry took advantage of the temporary silence to eat 
more breakfast. Hermione was peering into Fred and 
George’s boxes, though every now and then she cast 
sideways looks at Harry. Ron, who was now helping 
himself to Harry’s toast, was still gazing dreamily at 
the door. 

Page | 107 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“What’s this?” Hermione asked eventually, holding up 
what looked like a small telescope. 

“Dunno,” said Ron, “but if Fred and George’ve left it 
here, it’s probably not ready for the joke shop yet, so 
be careful.” 

“Your mum said the shop’s going well,” said Harry. 
“Said Fred and George have got a real flair for 
business.” 

“That’s an understatement,” said Ron. “They’re raking 
in the Galleons! I can’t wait to see the place, we 
haven’t been to Diagon Alley yet, because Mum says 
Dad’s got to be there for extra security and he’s been 
really busy at work, but it sounds excellent.” 

“And what about Percy?” asked Harry; the third- 
eldest Weasley brother had fallen out with the rest of 
the family. “Is he talking to your mum and dad 
again?” 

“Nope,” said Ron. 

“But he knows your dad was right all along now 
about Voldemort being back — ” 

“Dumbledore says people find it far easier to forgive 
others for being wrong than being right,” said 
Hermione. “I heard him telling your mum, Ron.” 

“Sounds like the sort of mental thing Dumbledore 
would say,” said Ron. 

“He’s going to be giving me private lessons this year,” 
said Harry conversationally. 

Ron choked on his bit of toast, and Hermione gasped. 



Page | 108 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You kept that quiet!” said Ron. 

“I only just remembered,” said Harry honestly. “He 
told me last night in your broom shed.” 

“Blimey ... private lessons with Dumbledore!” said 
Ron, looking impressed. “I wonder why he’s ... ?” 

His voice tailed away. Harry saw him and Hermione 
exchange looks. Harry laid down his knife and fork, 
his heart beating rather fast considering that all he 
was doing was sitting in bed. Dumbledore had said to 
do it. ... Why not now? He fixed his eyes on his fork, 
which was gleaming in the sunlight streaming into his 
lap, and said, “I don’t know exactly why he’s going to 
be giving me lessons, but I think it must be because 
of the prophecy.” 

Neither Ron nor Hermione spoke. Harry had the 
impression that both had frozen. He continued, still 
speaking to his fork, “You know, the one they were 
trying to steal at the Ministry.” 

“Nobody knows what it said, though,” said Hermione 
quickly. “It got smashed.” 

“Although the Prophet says — ” began Ron, but 
Hermione said, “Shh!” 

“The Prophet’s got it right,” said Harry, looking up at 
them both with a great effort: Hermione seemed 
frightened and Ron amazed. “That glass ball that 
smashed wasn’t the only record of the prophecy. I 
heard the whole thing in Dumbledore ’s office, he was 
the one the prophecy was made to, so he could tell 
me. From what it said,” Harry took a deep breath, “it 
looks like I’m the one who’s got to finish off 
Voldemort. ... At least, it said neither of us could live 
while the other survives.” 

Page | 109 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




The three of them gazed at one another in silence for 
a moment. Then there was a loud bang and Hermione 
vanished behind a puff of black smoke. 

“Hermione!” shouted Harry and Ron; the breakfast 
tray slid to the floor with a crash. 

Hermione emerged, coughing, out of the smoke, 
clutching the telescope and sporting a brilliantly 
purple black eye. 

“I squeezed it and it — it punched me!” she gasped. 

And sure enough, they now saw a tiny fist on a long 
spring protruding from the end of the telescope. 

“Don’t worry,” said Ron, who was plainly trying not to 
laugh, “Mumll fix that, she’s good at healing minor 
injuries — ” 

“Oh well, never mind that now!” said Hermione 
hastily. “Harry, oh, Harry ...” 

She sat down on the edge of his bed again. 

“We wondered, after we got back from the Ministry ... 
Obviously, we didn’t want to say anything to you, but 
from what Lucius Malfoy said about the prophecy, 
how it was about you and Voldemort, well, we 
thought it might be something like this. ... Oh, Harry 
...” She stared at him, then whispered, “Are you 
scared?” 

“Not as much as I was,” said Harry. “When I first 
heard it, I was . . . but now, it seems as though I 
always knew I’d have to face him in the end. ...” 

“When we heard Dumbledore was collecting you in 
person, we thought he might be telling you something 

Page | 110 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




or showing you something to do with the prophecy,” 
said Ron eagerly. “And we were kind of right, weren’t 
we? He wouldn’t be giving you lessons if he thought 
you were a goner, wouldn’t waste his time — he must 
think you’ve got a chance!” 

“That’s true,” said Hermione. “I wonder what he’ll 
teach you, Harry? Really advanced defensive magic, 
probably ... powerful countercurses ... anti-jinxes ...” 

Harry did not really listen. A warmth was spreading 
through him that had nothing to do with the sunlight; 
a tight obstruction in his chest seemed to be 
dissolving. He knew that Ron and Hermione were 
more shocked than they were letting on, but the mere 
fact that they were still there on either side of him, 
speaking bracing words of comfort, not shrinking 
from him as though he were contaminated or 
dangerous, was worth more than he could ever tell 
them. 

"... and evasive enchantments generally,” concluded 
Hermione. “Well, at least you know one lesson you’ll 
be having this year, that’s one more than Ron and 
me. I wonder when our O.W.L. results will come?” 

“Can’t be long now, it’s been a month,” said Ron. 

“Hang on,” said Harry, as another part of last night’s 
conversation came back to him. “I think Dumbledore 
said our O.W.L. results would be arriving today!” 

“Today?” shrieked Hermione. “Today? But why didn’t 
you — oh my God — you should have said — ” 

She leapt to her feet. 

“I’m going to see whether any owls have come. ...” 



Page | 111 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




But when Harry arrived downstairs ten minutes later, 
fully dressed and carrying his empty breakfast tray, it 
was to find Hermione sitting at the kitchen table in 
great agitation, while Mrs. Weasley tried to lessen her 
resemblance to half a panda. 

“It just won’t budge,” Mrs. Weasley was saying 
anxiously, standing over Hermione with her wand in 
her hand and a copy of The Healer’s Helpmate open at 
“Bruises, Cuts, and Abrasions.” “This has always 
worked before, I just can’t understand it.” 

“It’ll be Fred and George’s idea of a funny joke, 
making sure it can’t come off,” said Ginny 

“But it’s got to come off!” squeaked Hermione. “I can’t 
go around looking like this forever!” 

“You won’t, dear, we’ll find an antidote, don’t worry,” 
said Mrs. Weasley soothingly. 

“Bill told me ’ow Fred and George are very amusing!” 
said Fleur, smiling serenely. 

“Yes, I can hardly breathe for laughing,” snapped 
Hermione. 

She jumped up and started walking round and round 
the kitchen, twisting her fingers together. 

“Mrs. Weasley, you’re quite, quite sure no owls have 
arrived this morning?” 

“Yes, dear, I’d have noticed,” said Mrs. Weasley 
patiently. “But it’s barely nine, there’s still plenty of 
time. ...” 

“I know I messed up Ancient Runes,” muttered 
Hermione feverishly, “I definitely made at least one 

Page | 112 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




serious mistranslation. And the Defense Against the 
Dark Arts practical was no good at all. I thought 
Transfiguration went all right at the time, but looking 
back — ” 

“Hermione, will you shut up, you’re not the only one 
who’s nervous!” barked Ron. “And when you’ve got 
your eleven ‘Outstanding’ O.W.L.s ...” 

“Don’t, don’t, don’t!” said Hermione, flapping her 
hands hysterically. “I know I’ve failed everything!” 

“What happens if we fail?” Harry asked the room at 
large, but it was again Hermione who answered. 

“We discuss our options with our Head of House, I 
asked Professor McGonagall at the end of last term.” 

Harry’s stomach squirmed. He wished he had eaten 
less breakfast. 

“At Beauxbatons,” said Fleur complacently, “we ’ad a 
different way of doing things. I think eet was better. 
We sat our examinations after six years of study, not 
five, and then — ” 

Fleur’s words were drowned in a scream. Hermione 
was pointing through the kitchen window. Three 
black specks were clearly visible in the sky, growing 
larger all the time. 

“They’re definitely owls,” said Ron hoarsely, jumping 
up to join Hermione at the window. 

“And there are three of them,” said Harry, hastening 
to her other side. 

“One for each of us,” said Hermione in a terrified 
whisper. “Oh no ... oh no ... oh no ...” 

Page | 113 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




She gripped both Harry and Ron tightly around the 
elbows. 



The owls were flying directly at the Burrow, three 
handsome tawnies, each of which, it became clear as 
they flew lower over the path leading up to the house, 
was carrying a large square envelope. 

“Oh no\” squealed Hermione. 

Mrs. Weasley squeezed past them and opened the 
kitchen window. One, two, three, the owls soared 
through it and landed on the table in a neat line. All 
three of them lifted their right legs. 

Harry moved forward. The letter addressed to him 
was tied to the leg of the owl in the middle. He untied 
it with fumbling fingers. To his left, Ron was trying to 
detach his own results; to his right, Hermione’s 
hands were shaking so much she was making her 
whole owl tremble. 

Nobody in the kitchen spoke. At last, Harry managed 
to detach the envelope. He slit it open quickly and 
unfolded the parchment inside. 

ORDINARY WIZARDING LEVEL RESULTS 



Pass Grades Fail Grades 

Outstanding (O) Poor (P) 

Exceeds Expectations (E) Dreadful (D) 

Acceptable (A) Troll (T) 

Harry James Potter has achieved: 

Astronomy A 

Care of Magical Creatures E 

Page | 114 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Charms E 

Defense Against the Dark ArtsO 
Divination P 

Herbology E 

History of Magic D 

Potions E 

Transfiguration E 



Harry read the parchment through several times, his 
breathing becoming easier with each reading. It was 
all right: He had always known that he would fail 
Divination, and he had had no chance of passing 
History of Magic, given that he had collapsed halfway 
through the examination, but he had passed 
everything else! He ran his finger down the grades ... 
he had passed well in Transfiguration and Herbology, 
he had even exceeded expectations at Potions! And 
best of all, he had achieved “Outstanding” at Defense 
Against the Dark Arts! 

He looked around. Hermione had her back to him and 
her head bent, but Ron was looking delighted. 

“Only failed Divination and History of Magic, and who 
cares about them?” he said happily to Harry. “Here — 
swap — ” 

Harry glanced down Ron’s grades: There were no 
“Outstandings” there. ... 

“Knew you’d be top at Defense Against the Dark Arts,” 
said Ron, punching Harry on the shoulder. “We’ve 
done all right, haven’t we?” 

“Well done!” said Mrs. Weasley proudly, ruffling Ron’s 
hair. “Seven O.W.L.s, that’s more than Fred and 
George got together!” 



Page | 115 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Hermione?” said Ginny tentatively, for Hermione still 
hadn’t turned around. “How did you do?” 

“I — not bad,” said Hermione in a small voice. 

“Oh, come off it,” said Ron, striding over to her and 
whipping her results out of her hand. “Yep — nine 
‘Outstandings’ and one ‘Exceeds Expectations’ at 
Defense Against the Dark Arts.” He looked down at 
her, half-amused, half-exasperated. “You’re actually 
disappointed, aren’t you?” 

Hermione shook her head, but Harry laughed. 

“Well, we’re N.E.W.T. students now!” grinned Ron. 
“Mum, are there any more sausages?” 

Harry looked back down at his results. They were as 
good as he could have hoped for. He felt just one tiny 
twinge of regret. ... This was the end of his ambition 
to become an Auror. He had not secured the required 
Potions grade. He had known all along that he 
wouldn’t, but he still felt a sinking in his stomach as 
he looked again at that small black E. 

It was odd, really, seeing that it had been a Death 
Eater in disguise who had first told Harry he would 
make a good Auror, but somehow the idea had taken 
hold of him, and he couldn’t really think of anything 
else he would like to be. Moreover, it had seemed the 
right destiny for him since he had heard the prophecy 
a few weeks ago. ... Neither can live while the other 
survives. ... Wouldn’t he be living up to the prophecy, 
and giving himself the best chance of survival, if he 
joined those highly trained wizards whose job it was 
to find and kill Voldemort? 



Page | 116 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




6 




DRACO’S DETOUR 

Harry remained within the confines of the Burrow’s 
garden over the next few weeks. He spent most of his 
days playing two-a-side Quidditch in the Weasleys’ 
orchard (he and Hermione against Ron and Ginny; 
Hermione was dreadful and Ginny good, so they were 
reasonably well matched) and his evenings eating 
triple helpings of everything Mrs. Weasley put in front 
of him. 

It would have been a happy, peaceful holiday had it 
not been for the stories of disappearances, odd 
accidents, even of deaths now appearing almost daily 
in the Prophet Sometimes Bill and Mr. Weasley 
brought home news before it even reached the paper. 
To Mrs. Weasley’s displeasure, Harry’s sixteenth 
birthday celebrations were marred by grisly tidings 
brought to the party by Remus Lupin, who was 
looking gaunt and grim, his brown hair streaked 
liberally with gray, his clothes more ragged and 
patched than ever. 



Page | 117 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



“There have been another couple of dementor 
attacks,” he announced, as Mrs. Weasley passed him 
a large slice of birthday cake. “And they’ve found Igor 
Karkaroff’s body in a shack up north. The Dark Mark 
had been set over it — well, frankly, I’m surprised he 
stayed alive for even a year after deserting the Death 
Eaters; Sirius’s brother, Regulus, only managed a few 
days as far as I can remember.” 

“Yes, well,” said Mrs. Weasley, frowning, “perhaps we 
should talk about something diff — ” 

“Did you hear about Florean Fortescue, Remus?” 
asked Bill, who was being plied with wine by Fleur. 
“The man who ran — ” 

“ — the ice-cream place in Diagon Alley?” Harry 
interrupted, with an unpleasant, hollow sensation in 
the pit of his stomach. “He used to give me free ice 
creams. What’s happened to him?” 

“Dragged off, by the look of his place.” 

“Why?” asked Ron, while Mrs. Weasley pointedly 
glared at Bill. 

“Who knows? He must’ve upset them somehow. He 
was a good man, Florean.” 

“Talking of Diagon Alley,” said Mr. Weasley, “looks 
like Ollivander’s gone too.” 

“The wandmaker?” said Ginny, looking startled. 

“That’s the one. Shop’s empty. No sign of a struggle. 
No one knows whether he left voluntarily or was 
kidnapped.” 

“But wands — what’ll people do for wands?” 

Page | 118 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“They’ll make do with other makers,” said Lupin. “But 
Ollivander was the best, and if the other side have got 
him it’s not so good for us.” 

The day after this rather gloomy birthday tea, their 
letters and booklists arrived from Hogwarts. Harry’s 
included a surprise: He had been made Quidditch 
Captain. 

“That gives you equal status with prefects!” cried 
Hermione happily. “You can use our special bathroom 
now and everything!” 

“Wow, I remember when Charlie wore one of these,” 
said Ron, examining the badge with glee. “Harry, this 
is so cool, you’re my Captain — if you let me back on 
the team, I suppose, ha ha. ...” 

“Well, I don’t suppose we can put off a trip to Diagon 
Alley much longer now you’ve got these,” sighed Mrs. 
Weasley, looking down Ron’s booklist. “We’ll go on 
Saturday as long as your father doesn’t have to go 
into work again. I’m not going there without him.” 

“Mum, d’you honestly think You-Know- Who’s going to 
be hiding behind a bookshelf in Flourish and Blotts?” 
sniggered Ron. 

“Fortescue and Ollivander went on holiday, did they?” 
said Mrs. Weasley, firing up at once. “If you think 
security’s a laughing matter you can stay behind and 
I’ll get your things myself — ” 

“No, I wanna come, I want to see Fred and George’s 
shop!” said Ron hastily. 

“Then you just buck up your ideas, young man, 
before I decide you’re too immature to come with us!” 
said Mrs. Weasley angrily, snatching up her clock, all 

Page | 119 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




nine hands of which were still pointing at “mortal 
peril,” and balancing it on top of a pile of just- 
laundered towels. “And that goes for returning to 
Hogwarts as well!” 

Ron turned to stare incredulously at Harry as his 
mother hoisted the laundry basket and the teetering 
clock into her arms and stormed out of the room. 

“Blimey ... you can’t even make a joke round here 
anymore. ...” 

But Ron was careful not to be flippant about 
Voldemort over the next few days. Saturday dawned 
without any more outbursts from Mrs. Weasley, 
though she seemed very tense at breakfast. Bill, who 
would be staying at home with Fleur (much to 
Hermione and Ginny’s pleasure), passed a full money 
bag across the table to Harry. 

“Where’s mine?” demanded Ron at once, his eyes 
wide. 

“That’s already Harry’s, idiot,” said Bill. “I got it out of 
your vault for you, Harry, because it’s taking about 
five hours for the public to get to their gold at the 
moment, the goblins have tightened security so 
much. Two days ago Arkie Philpott had a Probity 
Probe stuck up his ... Well, trust me, this way’s 
easier.” 

“Thanks, Bill,” said Harry, pocketing his gold. 

“ ’E is always so thoughtful,” purred Fleur adoringly, 
stroking Bill’s nose. Ginny mimed vomiting into her 
cereal behind Fleur. Harry choked over his 
cornflakes, and Ron thumped him on the back. 



Page | 120 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




It was an overcast, murky day. One of the special 
Ministry of Magic cars, in which Harry had ridden 
once before, was awaiting them in the front yard 
when they emerged from the house, pulling on their 
cloaks. 

“It’s good Dad can get us these again,” said Ron 
appreciatively, stretching luxuriously as the car 
moved smoothly away from the Burrow, Bill and Fleur 
waving from the kitchen window. He, Harry, 

Hermione, and Ginny were all sitting in roomy 
comfort in the wide backseat. 

“Don’t get used to it, it’s only because of Harry,” said 
Mr. Weasley over his shoulder. He and Mrs. Weasley 
were in front with the Ministry driver; the front 
passenger seat had obligingly stretched into what 
resembled a two-seater sofa. “He’s been given top- 
grade security status. And we’ll be joining up with 
additional security at the Leaky Cauldron too.” 

Harry said nothing; he did not much fancy doing his 
shopping while surrounded by a battalion of Aurors. 
He had stowed his Invisibility Cloak in his backpack 
and felt that, if that was good enough for 
Dumbledore, it ought to be good enough for the 
Ministry, though now he came to think of it, he was 
not sure the Ministry knew about his cloak. 

“Here you are, then,” said the driver, a surprisingly 
short while later, speaking for the first time as he 
slowed in Charing Cross Road and stopped outside 
the Leaky Cauldron. “I’m to wait for you, any idea 
how long you 11 be?” 

“A couple of hours, I expect,” said Mr. Weasley. “Ah, 
good, he’s here!” 



Page | 121 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry imitated Mr. Weasley and peered through the 
window; his heart leapt. There were no Aurors waiting 
outside the inn, but instead the gigantic, black- 
bearded form of Rubeus Hagrid, the Hogwarts 
gamekeeper, wearing a long beaverskin coat, beaming 
at the sight of Harry’s face and oblivious to the 
startled stares of passing Muggles. 

“Harry!” he boomed, sweeping Harry into a bone- 
crushing hug the moment Harry had stepped out of 
the car. “Buckbeak — Witherwings, I mean — yeh 
should see him, Harry, he’s so happy ter be back in 
the open air — ” 

“Glad he’s pleased,” said Harry, grinning as he 
massaged his ribs. “We didn’t know ‘security’ meant 
you!” 

“I know, jus’ like old times, innit? See, the Ministry 
wanted ter send a bunch o’ Aurors, but Dumbledore 
said I’d do,” said Hagrid proudly, throwing out his 
chest and tucking his thumbs into his pockets. “Let’s 
get goin’ then — after yeh, Molly, Arthur — ” 

The Leaky Cauldron was, for the first time in Harry’s 
memory, completely empty. Only Tom the landlord, 
wizened and toothless, remained of the old crowd. He 
looked up hopefully as they entered, but before he 
could speak, Hagrid said importantly, “Jus’ passin’ 
through today, Tom, sure yeh understand, Hogwarts 
business, yeh know.” 

Tom nodded gloomily and returned to wiping glasses; 
Harry, Hermione, Hagrid, and the Weasleys walked 
through the bar and out into the chilly little courtyard 
at the back where the dustbins stood. Hagrid raised 
his pink umbrella and rapped a certain brick in the 
wall, which opened at once to form an archway onto a 



Page | 122 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




winding cobbled street. They stepped through the 
entrance and paused, looking around. 

Diagon Alley had changed. The colorful, glittering 
window displays of spellbooks, potion ingredients, 
and cauldrons were lost to view, hidden behind the 
large Ministry of Magic posters that had been pasted 
over them. Most of these somber purple posters 
carried blown-up versions of the security advice on 
the Ministry pamphlets that had been sent out over 
the summer, but others bore moving black-and-white 
photographs of Death Eaters known to be on the 
loose. Bellatrix Lestrange was sneering from the front 
of the nearest apothecary. A few windows were 
boarded up, including those of Florean Fortescue’s Ice 
Cream Parlor. On the other hand, a number of 
shabby-looking stalls had sprung up along the street. 
The nearest one, which had been erected outside 
Flourish and Blotts, under a striped, stained awning, 
had a cardboard sign pinned to its front: 

AMULETS 

Effective Against Werewolves, Dementors, and Inferi 

A seedy-looking little wizard was rattling armfuls of 
silver symbols on chains at passersby. 

“One for your little girl, madam?” he called at Mrs. 
Weasley as they passed, leering at Ginny. “Protect her 
pretty neck?” 

“If I were on duty ...” said Mr. Weasley, glaring angrily 
at the amulet seller. 

“Yes, but don’t go arresting anyone now, dear, we’re 
in a hurry,” said Mrs. Weasley, nervously consulting a 
list. “I think we’d better do Madam Malkin’s first, 
Hermione wants new dress robes, and Ron’s showing 

Page | 123 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




much too much ankle in his school robes, and you 
must need new ones too, Harry, you’ve grown so 
much — come on, everyone — ” 

“Molly, it doesn’t make sense for all of us to go to 
Madam Malkin’s,” said Mr. Weasley. “Why don’t those 
three go with Hagrid, and we can go to Flourish and 
Blotts and get everyone’s schoolbooks?” 

“I don’t know,” said Mrs. Weasley anxiously, clearly 
torn between a desire to finish the shopping quickly 
and the wish to stick together in a pack. “Hagrid, do 
you think — ?” 

“Don’ fret, they’ll be fine with me, Molly,” said Hagrid 
soothingly, waving an airy hand the size of a dustbin 
lid. Mrs. Weasley did not look entirely convinced, but 
allowed the separation, scurrying off toward Flourish 
and Blotts with her husband and Ginny while Harry, 
Ron, Hermione, and Hagrid set off for Madam 
Malkin’s. 

Harry noticed that many of the people who passed 
them had the same harried, anxious look as Mrs. 
Weasley, and that nobody was stopping to talk 
anymore; the shoppers stayed together in their own 
tightly knit groups, moving intently about their 
business. Nobody seemed to be shopping alone. 

“Migh’ be a bit of a squeeze in there with all of us,” 
said Hagrid, stopping outside Madam Malkin’s and 
bending down to peer through the window. “I’ll stand 
guard outside, all right?” 

So Harry, Ron, and Hermione entered the little shop 
together. It appeared, at first glance, to be empty, but 
no sooner had the door swung shut behind them than 
they heard a familiar voice issuing from behind a rack 
of dress robes in spangled green and blue. 

Page | 124 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




"... not a child, in case you haven’t noticed, Mother. I 
am perfectly capable of doing my shopping alone.” 

There was a clucking noise and a voice Harry 
recognized as that of Madam Malkin, the owner, said, 
“Now, dear, your mother’s quite right, none of us is 
supposed to go wandering around on our own 
anymore, it’s nothing to do with being a child — ” 

“Watch where you’re sticking that pin, will you!” 

A teenage boy with a pale, pointed face and white- 
blond hair appeared from behind the rack, wearing a 
handsome set of dark green robes that glittered with 
pins around the hem and the edges of the sleeves. He 
strode to the mirror and examined himself; it was a 
few moments before he noticed Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione reflected over his shoulder. His light gray 
eyes narrowed. 

“If you’re wondering what the smell is, Mother, a 
Mudblood just walked in,” said Draco Malfoy. 

“I don’t think there’s any need for language like that!” 
said Madam Malkin, scurrying out from behind the 
clothes rack holding a tape measure and a wand. 
“And I don’t want wands drawn in my shop either!” 
she added hastily, for a glance toward the door had 
shown her Harry and Ron both standing there with 
their wands out and pointing at Malfoy. Hermione, 
who was standing slightly behind them, whispered, 
“No, don’t, honestly, it’s not worth it. ...” 

“Yeah, like you’d dare do magic out of school,” 
sneered Malfoy. “Who blacked your eye, Granger? I 
want to send them flowers.” 



Page | 125 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“That’s quite enough!” said Madam Malkin sharply, 
looking over her shoulder for support. “Madam — 
please — ” 

Narcissa Malfoy strolled out from behind the clothes 
rack. 

“Put those away,” she said coldly to Harry and Ron. 

“If you attack my son again, I shall ensure that it is 
the last thing you ever do.” 

“Really?” said Harry, taking a step forward and gazing 
into the smoothly arrogant face that, for all its pallor, 
still resembled her sister’s. He was as tall as she was 
now. “Going to get a few Death Eater pals to do us in, 
are you?” 

Madam Malkin squealed and clutched at her heart. 

“Really, you shouldn’t accuse — dangerous thing to 
say — wands away, please!” 

But Harry did not lower his wand. Narcissa Malfoy 
smiled unpleasantly. 

“I see that being Dumbledore’s favorite has given you 
a false sense of security, Harry Potter. But 
Dumbledore won’t always be there to protect you.” 

Harry looked mockingly all around the shop. “Wow ... 
look at that ... he’s not here now! So why not have a 
go? They might be able to find you a double cell in 
Azkaban with your loser of a husband!” 

Malfoy made an angry movement toward Harry, but 
stumbled over his overlong robe. Ron laughed loudly. 

“Don’t you dare talk to my mother like that, Potter!” 
Malfoy snarled. 

Page | 126 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s all right, Draco,” said Narcissa, restraining him 
with her thin white fingers upon his shoulder. “I 
expect Potter will be reunited with dear Sirius before I 
am reunited with Lucius.” 

Harry raised his wand higher. 

“Harry, no!” moaned Hermione, grabbing his arm and 
attempting to push it down by his side. “Think. ... 

You mustn’t. ... You’ll be in such trouble. ...” 

Madam Malkin dithered for a moment on the spot, 
then seemed to decide to act as though nothing was 
happening in the hope that it wouldn’t. She bent 
toward Malfoy, who was still glaring at Harry. 

“I think this left sleeve could come up a little bit more, 
dear, let me just — ” 

“Ouch!” bellowed Malfoy, slapping her hand away. 
“Watch where you’re putting your pins, woman! 
Mother — I don’t think I want these anymore — ” 

He pulled the robes over his head and threw them 
onto the floor at Madam Malkin’s feet. 

“You’re right, Draco,” said Narcissa, with a 
contemptuous glance at Hermione, “now I know the 
kind of scum that shops here. ... We’ll do better at 
Twilfitt and Tatting’s.” 

And with that, the pair of them strode out of the 
shop, Malfoy taking care to bang as hard as he could 
into Ron on the way out. 

“Well, reallyl” said Madam Malkin, snatching up the 
fallen robes and moving the tip of her wand over them 
like a vacuum cleaner, so that it removed all the dust. 



Page | 127 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




She was distracted all through the fitting of Ron’s and 
Harry’s new robes, tried to sell Hermione wizard’s 
dress robes instead of witch’s, and when she finally 
bowed them out of the shop it was with an air of 
being glad to see the back of them. 

“Got ev’rything?” asked Hagrid brightly when they 
reappeared at his side. 

“Just about,” said Harry. “Did you see the Malfoys?” 

“Yeah,” said Hagrid, unconcerned. “Bu’ they wouldn’ 
dare make trouble in the middle o’ Diagon Alley, 
Harry. Don’ worry abou’ them.” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione exchanged looks, but 
before they could disabuse Hagrid of this comfortable 
notion, Mr. and Mrs. Weasley and Ginny appeared, all 
clutching heavy packages of books. 

“Everyone all right?” said Mrs. Weasley. “Got your 
robes? Right then, we can pop in at the Apothecary 
and Eeylops on the way to Fred and George’s — stick 
close, now. ...” 

Neither Harry nor Ron bought any ingredients at the 
Apothecary, seeing that they were no longer studying 
Potions, but both bought large boxes of owl nuts for 
Hedwig and Pigwidgeon at Eeylops Owl Emporium. 
Then, with Mrs. Weasley checking her watch every 
minute or so, they headed farther along the street in 
search of Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes, the joke shop 
run by Fred and George. 

“We really haven’t got too long,” Mrs. Weasley said. 

“So we’ll just have a quick look around and then back 
to the car. We must be close, that’s number ninety- 
two ... ninety-four ...” 



Page | 128 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Whoa,” said Ron, stopping in his tracks. 

Set against the dull, poster-muffled shop fronts 
around them, Fred and George’s windows hit the eye 
like a firework display. Casual passersby were looking 
back over their shoulders at the windows, and a few 
rather stunned-looking people had actually come to a 
halt, transfixed. The left-hand window was dazzlingly 
full of an assortment of goods that revolved, popped, 
flashed, bounced, and shrieked; Harry’s eyes began to 
water just looking at it. The right-hand window was 
covered with a gigantic poster, purple like those of the 
Ministry, but emblazoned with flashing yellow letters: 

WHY ARE YOU WORRYING ABOUT 

YOU-KNOW-WHO? 

YOU SHOULD BE WORRYING ABOUT 
U-NO-POO— 

THE CONSTIPATION SENSATION 
THAT’S GRIPPING THE NATION! 

Harry started to laugh. He heard a weak sort of moan 
beside him and looked around to see Mrs. Weasley 
gazing, dumbfounded, at the poster. Her lips moved 
silently, mouthing the name “U-No-Poo.” 

“They’ll be murdered in their beds!” she whispered. 

“No they won’t!” said Ron, who, like Harry, was 
laughing. “This is brilliant!” 

And he and Harry led the way into the shop. It was 
packed with customers; Harry could not get near the 

Page | 129 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




shelves. He stared around, looking up at the boxes 
piled to the ceiling: Here were the Skiving Snackboxes 
that the twins had perfected during their last, 
unfinished year at Hogwarts; Harry noticed that the 
Nosebleed Nougat was most popular, with only one 
battered box left on the shelf. There were bins full of 
trick wands, the cheapest merely turning into rubber 
chickens or pairs of briefs when waved, the most 
expensive beating the unwary user around the head 
and neck, and boxes of quills, which came in Self- 
Inking, Spell-Checking, and Smart-Answer varieties. 

A space cleared in the crowd, and Harry pushed his 
way toward the counter, where a gaggle of delighted 
ten-year-olds was watching a tiny little wooden man 
slowly ascending the steps to a real set of gallows, 
both perched on a box that read: REUSABLE 
HANGMAN — SPELL IT OR HE’LL SWING! 

“ ‘Patented Daydream Charms . . . ’ ” 

Hermione had managed to squeeze through to a large 
display near the counter and was reading the 
information on the back of a box bearing a highly 
colored picture of a handsome youth and a swooning 
girl who were standing on the deck of a pirate ship. 

“ ‘One simple incantation and you will enter a top- 
quality, highly realistic, thirty-minute daydream, easy 
to fit into the average school lesson and virtually 
undetectable (side effects include vacant expression 
and minor drooling). Not for sale to under-sixteens.’ 
You know,” said Hermione, looking up at Harry, “that 
really is extraordinary magic!” 

“For that, Hermione,” said a voice behind them, “you 
can have one for free.” 



Page | 130 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




A beaming Fred stood before them, wearing a set of 
magenta robes that clashed magnificently with his 
flaming hair. 

“How are you, Harry?” They shook hands. “And 
what’s happened to your eye, Hermione?” 

“Your punching telescope,” she said ruefully. 

“Oh blimey, I forgot about those,” said Fred. “Here — ” 

He pulled a tub out of his pocket and handed it to 
her; she unscrewed it gingerly to reveal a thick yellow 
paste. 

“Just dab it on, that bruise’ll be gone within the 
hour,” said Fred. “We had to find a decent bruise 
remover. We’re testing most of our products on 
ourselves.” 

Hermione looked nervous. “It is safe, isn’t it?” she 
asked. 

“ ’Course it is,” said Fred bracingly. “Come on, Harry, 
I’ll give you a tour.” 

Harry left Hermione dabbing her black eye with paste 
and followed Fred toward the back of the shop, where 
he saw a stand of card and rope tricks. 

“Muggle magic tricks!” said Fred happily, pointing 
them out. “For freaks like Dad, you know, who love 
Muggle stuff. It’s not a big earner, but we do fairly 
steady business, they’re great novelties. ... Oh, here’s 
George. ...” 

Fred’s twin shook Harry’s hand energetically. 



Page | 131 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Giving him the tour? Come through the back, Harry, 
that’s where we’re making the real money — pocket 
anything, you, and you’ll pay in more than GalleonsV’ 
he added warningly to a small boy who hastily 
whipped his hand out of the tub labeled EDIBLE 
DARK MARKS — THEY’LL MAKE ANYONE SICK! 

George pushed back a curtain beside the Muggle 
tricks and Harry saw a darker, less crowded room. 
The packaging on the products lining these shelves 
was more subdued. 

“We’ve just developed this more serious line,” said 
Fred. “Funny how it happened ...” 

“You wouldn’t believe how many people, even people 
who work at the Ministry, can’t do a decent Shield 
Charm,” said George. “ ’Course, they didn’t have you 
teaching them, Harry.” 

“That’s right. ... Well, we thought Shield Hats were a 
bit of a laugh, you know, challenge your mate to jinx 
you while wearing it and watch his face when the jinx 
just bounces off. But the Ministry bought five 
hundred for all its support staff! And we’re still 
getting massive orders!” 

“So we’ve expanded into a range of Shield Cloaks, 
Shield Gloves ...” 

"... I mean, they wouldn’t help much against the 
Unforgivable Curses, but for minor to moderate hexes 
or jinxes ...” 

“And then we thought we’d get into the whole area of 
Defense Against the Dark Arts, because it’s such a 
money spinner,” continued George enthusiastically. 
“This is cool. Look, Instant Darkness Powder, we’re 



Page | 132 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




importing it from Peru. Handy if you want to make a 
quick escape.” 

“And our Decoy Detonators are just walking off the 
shelves, look,” said Fred, pointing at a number of 
weird-looking black horn-type objects that were 
indeed attempting to scurry out of sight. “You just 
drop one surreptitiously and it’ll run off and make a 
nice loud noise out of sight, giving you a diversion if 
you need one. 

“Handy,” said Harry, impressed. 

“Here,” said George, catching a couple and throwing 
them to Harry. 

A young witch with short blonde hair poked her head 
around the curtain; Harry saw that she too was 
wearing magenta staff robes. 

“There’s a customer out here looking for a joke 
cauldron, Mr. Weasley and Mr. Weasley,” she said. 

Harry found it very odd to hear Fred and George 
called “Mr. Weasley,” but they took it in their stride. 

“Right you are, Verity, I’m coming,” said George 
promptly. “Harry, you help yourself to anything you 
want, all right? No charge.” 

“I can’t do that!” said Harry, who had already pulled 
out his money bag to pay for the Decoy Detonators. 

“You don’t pay here,” said Fred firmly, waving away 
Harry’s gold. 

“But — ” 



Page | 133 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You gave us our start-up loan, we haven’t forgotten,” 
said George sternly. “Take whatever you like, and just 
remember to tell people where you got it, if they ask.” 

George swept off through the curtain to help with the 
customers, and Fred led Harry back into the main 
part of the shop to find Hermione and Ginny still 
poring over the Patented Daydream Charms. 

“Haven’t you girls found our special WonderWitch 
products yet?” asked Fred. “Follow me, ladies. ...” 

Near the window was an array of violently pink 
products around which a cluster of excited girls was 
giggling enthusiastically. Hermione and Ginny both 
hung back, looking wary. 

“There you go,” said Fred proudly. “Best range of love 
potions you’ll find anywhere.” 

Ginny raised an eyebrow skeptically. “Do they work?” 
she asked. 

“Certainly they work, for up to twenty-four hours at a 
time depending on the weight of the boy in question 



“ — and the attractiveness of the girl,” said George, 
reappearing suddenly at their side. “But we’re not 
selling them to our sister,” he added, becoming 
suddenly stern, “not when she’s already got about five 
boys on the go from what we’ve — ” 

“Whatever you’ve heard from Ron is a big fat lie,” said 
Ginny calmly, leaning forward to take a small pink 
pot off the shelf. “What’s this?” 

“Guaranteed ten-second pimple vanisher,” said Fred. 
“Excellent on everything from boils to blackheads, but 

Page | 134 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




don’t change the subject. Are you or are you not 
currently going out with a boy called Dean Thomas?” 

“Yes, I am,” said Ginny. “And last time I looked, he 
was definitely one boy, not five. What are those?” 

She was pointing at a number of round balls of fluff 
in shades of pink and purple, all rolling around the 
bottom of a cage and emitting high-pitched squeaks. 

“Pygmy Puffs,” said George. “Miniature puffskeins, we 
can’t breed them fast enough. So what about Michael 
Corner?” 

“I dumped him, he was a bad loser,” said Ginny, 
putting a finger through the bars of the cage and 
watching the Pygmy Puffs crowd around it. “They’re 
really cute!” 

“They’re fairly cuddly, yes,” conceded Fred. “But 
you’re moving through boyfriends a bit fast, aren’t 
you?” 

Ginny turned to look at him, her hands on her hips. 
There was such a Mrs. Weasley-ish glare on her face 
that Harry was surprised Fred didn’t recoil. 

“It’s none of your business. And I’ll thank you,” she 
added angrily to Ron, who had just appeared at 
George’s elbow, laden with merchandise, “not to tell 
tales about me to these two!” 

“That’s three Galleons, nine Sickles, and a Knut,” said 
Fred, examining the many boxes in Ron’s arms. 
“Cough up.” 

“I’m your brother!” 



Page | 135 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“And that’s our stuff you’re nicking. Three Galleons, 
nine Sickles. I’ll knock off the Knut.” 

“But I haven’t got three Galleons, nine Sickles!” 

“You’d better put it back then, and mind you put it on 
the right shelves.” 

Ron dropped several boxes, swore, and made a rude 
hand gesture at Fred that was unfortunately spotted 
by Mrs. Weasley, who had chosen that moment to 
appear. 

“If I see you do that again I’ll jinx your fingers 
together,” she said sharply. 

“Mum, can I have a Pygmy Puff?” said Ginny at once. 
“A what?” said Mrs. Weasley warily. 

“Look, they’re so sweet. ...” 

Mrs. Weasley moved aside to look at the Pygmy Puffs, 
and Harry, Ron, and Hermione momentarily had an 
unimpeded view out of the window. Draco Malfoy was 
hurrying up the street alone. As he passed Weasleys’ 
Wizard Wheezes, he glanced over his shoulder. 
Seconds later, he moved beyond the scope of the 
window and they lost sight of him. 

“Wonder where his mummy is?” said Harry, frowning. 

“Given her the slip by the looks of it,” said Ron. 

“Why, though?” said Hermione. 

Harry said nothing; he was thinking too hard. 

Narcissa Malfoy would not have let her precious son 
out of her sight willingly; Malfoy must have made a 

Page | 136 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




real effort to free himself from her clutches. Harry, 
knowing and loathing Malfoy, was sure the reason 
could not be innocent. 

He glanced around. Mrs. Weasley and Ginny were 
bending over the Pygmy Puffs. Mr. Weasley was 
delightedly examining a pack of Muggle marked 
playing cards. Fred and George were both helping 
customers. On the other side of the glass, Hagrid was 
standing with his back to them, looking up and down 
the street. 

“Get under here, quick,” said Harry, pulling his 
Invisibility Cloak out of his bag. 

“Oh — I don’t know, Harry,” said Hermione, looking 
uncertainly toward Mrs. Weasley. 

“Come on\” said Ron. 

She hesitated for a second longer, then ducked under 
the cloak with Harry and Ron. Nobody noticed them 
vanish; they were all too interested in Fred and 
George’s products. Harry, Ron, and Hermione 
squeezed their way out of the door as quickly as they 
could, but by the time they gained the street, Malfoy 
had disappeared just as successfully as they had. 

“He was going in that direction,” murmured Harry as 
quietly as possible, so that the humming Hagrid 
would not hear them. “C’mon.” 

They scurried along, peering left and right, through 
shop windows and doors, until Hermione pointed 
ahead. 

“That’s him, isn’t it?” she whispered. “Turning left?” 
“Big surprise,” whispered Ron. 

Page | 137 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




For Malfoy had glanced around, then slid into 
Knockturn Alley and out of sight. 



“Quick, or we’ll lose him,” said Harry, speeding up. 

“Our feet’ll be seen!” said Hermione anxiously, as the 
cloak flapped a little around their ankles; it was much 
more difficult hiding all three of them under the cloak 
nowadays. 

“It doesn’t matter,” said Harry impatiently. “Just 
hurry!” 

But Knockturn Alley, the side street devoted to the 
Dark Arts, looked completely deserted. They peered 
into windows as they passed, but none of the shops 
seemed to have any customers at all. Harry supposed 
it was a bit of a giveaway in these dangerous and 
suspicious times to buy Dark artifacts — or at least, 
to be seen buying them. 

Hermione gave his arm a hard pinch. 

“Ouch!” 

“Shh! Look! He’s in there!” she breathed in Harry’s 
ear. 

They had drawn level with the only shop in 
Knockturn Alley that Harry had ever visited, Borgin 
and Burkes, which sold a wide variety of sinister 
objects. There in the midst of the cases full of skulls 
and old bottles stood Draco Malfoy with his back to 
them, just visible beyond the very same large black 
cabinet in which Harry had once hidden to avoid 
Malfoy and his father. Judging by the movements of 
Malfoy’s hands, he was talking animatedly. The 
proprietor of the shop, Mr. Borgin, an oily-haired, 



Page | 138 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




stooping man, stood facing Malfoy. He was wearing a 
curious expression of mingled resentment and fear. 



“If only we could hear what they’re saying!” said 
Hermione. 

“We can!” said Ron excitedly. “Hang on — damn — ” 

He dropped a couple more of the boxes he was still 
clutching as he fumbled with the largest. 

“Extendable Ears, look!” 

“Fantastic!” said Hermione, as Ron unraveled the 
long, fleshcolored strings and began to feed them 
toward the bottom of the door. “Oh, I hope the door 
isn’t Imperturbable — ” 

“No!” said Ron gleefully. “Listen!” 

They put their heads together and listened intently to 
the ends of the strings, through which Malfoy’s voice 
could be heard loud and clear, as though a radio had 
been turned on. 

"... you know how to fix it?” 

“Possibly,” said Borgin, in a tone that suggested he 
was unwilling to commit himself. “I’ll need to see it, 
though. Why don’t you bring it into the shop?” 

“I can’t,” said Malfoy. “It’s got to stay put. I just need 
you to tell me how to do it.” 

Harry saw Borgin lick his lips nervously. 

“Well, without seeing it, I must say it will be a very 
difficult job, perhaps impossible. I couldn’t guarantee 
anything.” 

Page | 139 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No?” said Malfoy, and Harry knew, just by his tone, 
that Malfoy was sneering. “Perhaps this will make you 
more confident.” 

He moved toward Borgin and was blocked from view 
by the cabinet. Harry, Ron, and Hermione shuffled 
sideways to try and keep him in sight, but all they 
could see was Borgin, looking very frightened. 

“Tell anyone,” said Malfoy, “and there will be 
retribution. You know Fenrir Greyback? He’s a family 
friend. He’ll be dropping in from time to time to make 
sure you’re giving the problem your full attention.” 

“There will be no need for — ” 

“I’ll decide that,” said Malfoy. “Well, I’d better be off. 
And don’t forget to keep that one safe, I’ll need it.” 

“Perhaps you’d like to take it now?” 

“No, of course I wouldn’t, you stupid little man, how 
would I look carrying that down the street? Just don’t 
sell it.” 

“Of course not ... sir.” 

Borgin made a bow as deep as the one Harry had 
once seen him give Lucius Malfoy. 

“Not a word to anyone, Borgin, and that includes my 
mother, understand?” 

“Naturally, naturally,” murmured Borgin, bowing 
again. 

Next moment, the bell over the door tinkled loudly as 
Malfoy stalked out of the shop looking very pleased 
with himself. He passed so close to Harry, Ron, and 

Page | 140 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione that they felt the cloak flutter around their 
knees again. Inside the shop, Borgin remained frozen; 
his unctuous smile had vanished; he looked worried. 

“What was that about?” whispered Ron, reeling in the 
Extendable Ears. 

“Dunno,” said Harry, thinking hard. “He wants 
something mended . . . and he wants to reserve 
something in there. ... Could you see what he pointed 
at when he said ‘that one’?” 

“No, he was behind that cabinet — ” 

“You two stay here,” whispered Hermione. 

“What are you — ?” 

But Hermione had already ducked out from under the 
cloak. She checked her hair in the reflection in the 
glass, then marched into the shop, setting the bell 
tinkling again. Ron hastily fed the Extendable Ears 
back under the door and passed one of the strings to 
Harry. 

“Hello, horrible morning, isn’t it?” Hermione said 
brightly to Borgin, who did not answer, but cast her a 
suspicious look. Humming cheerily, Hermione strolled 
through the jumble of objects on display. 

“Is this necklace for sale?” she asked, pausing beside 
a glass-fronted case. 

“If you’ve got one and a half thousand Galleons,” said 
Mr. Borgin coldly. 

“Oh — er — no, I haven’t got quite that much,” said 
Hermione, walking on. “And ... what about this lovely 
— um — skull?” 

Page | 141 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Sixteen Galleons.” 



“So it’s for sale, then? It isn’t being ... kept for 
anyone?” 

Mr. Borgin squinted at her. Harry had the nasty 
feeling he knew exactly what Hermione was up to. 
Apparently Hermione felt she had been rumbled too 
because she suddenly threw caution to the winds. 

“The thing is, that — er — boy who was in here just 
now, Draco Malfoy, well, he’s a friend of mine, and I 
want to get him a birthday present, but if he’s already 
reserved anything, I obviously don’t want to get him 
the same thing, so ... um ...” 

It was a pretty lame story in Harry’s opinion, and 
apparently Borgin thought so too. 

“Out,” he said sharply. “Get out!” 

Hermione did not wait to be asked twice, but hurried 
to the door with Borgin at her heels. As the bell 
tinkled again, Borgin slammed the door behind her 
and put up the closed sign. 

“Ah well,” said Ron, throwing the cloak back over 
Hermione. “Worth a try, but you were a bit obvious — 



“Well, next time you can show me how it’s done, 
Master of Mystery!” she snapped. 

Ron and Hermione bickered all the way back to 
Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes, where they were forced to 
stop so that they could dodge undetected around a 
very anxious-looking Mrs. Weasley and Hagrid, who 
had clearly noticed their absence. Once in the shop, 
Harry whipped off the Invisibility Cloak, hid it in his 
Page | 142 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




bag, and joined in with the other two when they 
insisted, in answer to Mrs. Weasley’s accusations, 
that they had been in the back room all along, and 
that she could not have looked properly. 



Page | 143 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




7 




THE SLUG CLUB 

Harry spent a lot of the last week of the holidays 
pondering the meaning of Malfoy’s behavior in 
Knockturn Alley. What disturbed him most was the 
satisfied look on Malfoy’s face as he had left the shop. 
Nothing that made Malfoy look that happy could be 
good news. To his slight annoyance, however, neither 
Ron nor Hermione seemed quite as curious about 
Malfoy’s activities as he was; or at least, they seemed 
to get bored of discussing it after a few days. 

“Yes, I’ve already agreed it was fishy, Harry,” said 
Hermione a little impatiently. She was sitting on the 
windowsill in Fred and George’s room with her feet up 
on one of the cardboard boxes and had only 
grudgingly looked up from her new copy of Advanced 
Rune Translation. “But haven’t we agreed there could 
be a lot of explanations?” 

“Maybe he’s broken his Hand of Glory,” said Ron 
vaguely, as he attempted to straighten his 



Page | 144 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



broomstick’s bent tail twigs. “Remember that 
shriveled-up arm Malfoy had?” 

“But what about when he said, ‘Don’t forget to keep 
that one safe’?” asked Harry for the umpteenth time. 
“That sounded to me like Borgin’s got another one of 
the broken objects, and Malfoy wants both.” 

“You reckon?” said Ron, now trying to scrape some 
dirt off his broom handle. 

“Yeah, I do,” said Harry. When neither Ron nor 
Hermione answered, he said, “Malfoy’s father’s in 
Azkaban. Don’t you think Malfoy’d like revenge?” 

Ron looked up, blinking. 

“Malfoy, revenge? What can he do about it?” 

“That’s my point, I don’t know!” said Harry, 
frustrated. “But he’s up to something and I think we 
should take it seriously. His father’s a Death Eater 
and — ” 

Harry broke off, his eyes fixed on the window behind 
Hermione, his mouth open. A startling thought had 
just occurred to him. 

“Harry?” said Hermione in an anxious voice. “What’s 
wrong?” 

“Your scar’s not hurting again, is it?” asked Ron 
nervously. 

“He’s a Death Eater,” said Harry slowly. “He’s 
replaced his father as a Death Eater!” 



Page | 145 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




There was a silence; then Ron erupted in laughter. 
“Malfoy? He’s sixteen, Harry! You think You-Know- 
Who would let Malfoy join?” 

“It seems very unlikely, Harry,” said Hermione in a 
repressive sort of voice. “What makes you think — ?” 

“In Madam Malkin’s. She didn’t touch him, but he 
yelled and jerked his arm away from her when she 
went to roll up his sleeve. It was his left arm. He’s 
been branded with the Dark Mark.” 

Ron and Hermione looked at each other. 

“Well ...” said Ron, sounding thoroughly unconvinced. 

“I think he just wanted to get out of there, Harry,” 
said Hermione. 

“He showed Borgin something we couldn’t see,” Harry 
pressed on stubbornly. “Something that seriously 
scared Borgin. It was the Mark, I know it — he was 
showing Borgin who he was dealing with, you saw 
how seriously Borgin took him!” 

Ron and Hermione exchanged another look. 

“I’m not sure, Harry. ...” 

“Yeah, I still don’t reckon You-Know-Who would let 
Malfoy join. ...” 

Annoyed, but absolutely convinced he was right, 

Harry snatched up a pile of filthy Quidditch robes and 
left the room; Mrs. Weasley had been urging them for 
days not to leave their washing and packing until the 
last moment. On the landing he bumped into Ginny, 
who was returning to her room carrying a pile of 
freshly laundered clothes. 

Page | 146 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I wouldn’t go in the kitchen just now,” she warned 
him. “There’s a lot of Phlegm around.” 



“I’ll be careful not to slip in it.” Harry smiled. 

Sure enough, when he entered the kitchen it was to 
find Fleur sitting at the kitchen table, in full flow 
about plans for her wedding to Bill, while Mrs. 
Weasley kept watch over a pile of self-peeling sprouts, 
looking bad-tempered. 

“... Bill and I ’ave almost decided on only two 
bridesmaids, Ginny and Gabrielle will look very sweet 
togezzer. I am theenking of dressing zem in pale gold 
— pink would of course be ’orrible with Ginny’s ’air — 



“Ah, Harry!” said Mrs. Weasley loudly, cutting across 
Fleur’s monologue. “Good, I wanted to explain about 
the security arrangements for the journey to 
Hogwarts tomorrow. We’ve got Ministry cars again, 
and there will be Aurors waiting at the station — ” 

“Is Tonks going to be there?” asked Harry, handing 
over his Quidditch things. 

“No, I don’t think so, she’s been stationed somewhere 
else from what Arthur said.” 

“She has let ’erself go, zat Tonks,” Fleur mused, 
examining her own stunning reflection in the back of 
a teaspoon. “A big mistake if you ask — ” 

“Yes, thank you,” said Mrs. Weasley tartly, cutting 
across Fleur again. “You’d better get on, Harry, I want 
the trunks ready tonight, if possible, so we don’t have 
the usual last-minute scramble.” 



Page | 147 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




And in fact, their departure the following morning was 
smoother than usual. The Ministry cars glided up to 
the front of the Burrow to find them waiting, trunks 
packed; Hermione’s cat, Crookshanks, safely enclosed 
in his traveling basket; and Hedwig; Ron’s owl, 
Pigwidgeon; and Ginny’s new purple Pygmy Puff, 
Arnold, in cages. 

“Au revoir, ’Ariy,” said Fleur throatily, kissing him 
good-bye. Ron hurried forward, looking hopeful, but 
Ginny stuck out her foot and Ron fell, sprawling in 
the dust at Fleur’s feet. Furious, red-faced, and dirt- 
spattered, he hurried into the car without saying 
good-bye. 

There was no cheerful Hagrid waiting for them at 
King’s Cross Station. Instead, two grim-faced, 
bearded Aurors in dark Muggle suits moved forward 
the moment the cars stopped and, flanking the party, 
marched them into the station without speaking. 

“Quick, quick, through the barrier,” said Mrs. 

Weasley, who seemed a little flustered by this austere 
efficiency. “Harry had better go first, with — ” 

She looked inquiringly at one of the Aurors, who 
nodded briefly, seized Harry’s upper arm, and 
attempted to steer him toward the barrier between 
platforms nine and ten. 

“I can walk, thanks,” said Harry irritably, jerking his 
arm out of the Auror’s grip. He pushed his trolley 
directly at the solid barrier, ignoring his silent 
companion, and found himself, a second later, 
standing on platform nine and three-quarters, where 
the scarlet Hogwarts Express stood belching steam 
over the crowd. 



Page | 148 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione and the Weasleys joined him within 
seconds. Without waiting to consult his grim-faced 
Auror, Harry motioned to Ron and Hermione to follow 
him up the platform, looking for an empty 
compartment. 

“We can’t, Harry,” said Hermione, looking apologetic. 
“Ron and I’ve got to go to the prefects’ carriage first 
and then patrol the corridors for a bit.” 

“Oh yeah, I forgot,” said Harry. 

“You’d better get straight on the train, all of you, 
you’ve only got a few minutes to go,” said Mrs. 
Weasley, consulting her watch. “Well, have a lovely 
term, Ron. ...” 

“Mr. Weasley, can I have a quick word?” said Harry, 
making up his mind on the spur of the moment. 

“Of course,” said Mr. Weasley, who looked slightly 
surprised, but followed Harry out of earshot of the 
others nevertheless. 

Harry had thought it through carefully and come to 
the conclusion that, if he was to tell anyone, Mr. 
Weasley was the right person; firstly, because he 
worked at the Ministry and was therefore in the best 
position to make further investigations, and secondly, 
because he thought that there was not too much risk 
of Mr. Weasley exploding with anger. 

He could see Mrs. Weasley and the grim-faced Auror 
casting the pair of them suspicious looks as they 
moved away. 

“When we were in Diagon Alley,” Harry began, but Mr. 
Weasley forestalled him with a grimace. 



Page | 149 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Am I about to discover where you, Ron, and 
Hermione disappeared to while you were supposed to 
be in the back room of Fred and George’s shop?” 

“How did you — ?” 

“Harry, please. You’re talking to the man who raised 
Fred and George.” 

“Er ... yeah, all right, we weren’t in the back room.” 

“Very well, then, let’s hear the worst.” 

“Well, we followed Draco Malfoy. We used my 
Invisibility Cloak.” 

“Did you have any particular reason for doing so, or 
was it a mere whim?” 

“Because I thought Malfoy was up to something,” said 
Harry, disregarding Mr. Weasley’s look of mingled 
exasperation and amusement. “He’d given his mother 
the slip and I wanted to know why.” 

“Of course you did,” said Mr. Weasley, sounding 
resigned. “Well? Did you find out why?” 

“He went into Borgin and Burkes,” said Harry, “and 
started bullying the bloke in there, Borgin, to help 
him fix something. And he said he wanted Borgin to 
keep something else for him. He made it sound like it 
was the same kind of thing that needed fixing. Like 
they were a pair. And ...” 

Harry took a deep breath. 

“There’s something else. We saw Malfoy jump about a 
mile when Madam Malkin tried to touch his left arm. I 



Page | 150 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




think he’s been branded with the Dark Mark. I think 
he’s replaced his father as a Death Eater.” 

Mr. Weasley looked taken aback. After a moment he 
said, “Harry, I doubt whether You-Know-Who would 
allow a sixteen-year-old — ” 

“Does anyone really know what You-Know-Who would 
or wouldn’t do?” asked Harry angrily. “Mr. Weasley, 
I’m sorry, but isn’t it worth investigating? If Malfoy 
wants something fixing, and he needs to threaten 
Borgin to get it done, it’s probably something Dark or 
dangerous, isn’t it?” 

“I doubt it, to be honest, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley 
slowly. “You see, when Lucius Malfoy was arrested, 
we raided his house. We took away everything that 
might have been dangerous.” 

“I think you missed something,” said Harry 
stubbornly. 

“Well, maybe,” said Mr. Weasley, but Harry could tell 
that Mr. Weasley was humoring him. 

There was a whistle behind them; nearly everyone 
had boarded the train and the doors were closing. 

“You’d better hurry,” said Mr. Weasley, as Mrs. 
Weasley cried, “Harry, quickly!” 

He hurried forward and Mr. and Mrs. Weasley helped 
him load his trunk onto the train. 

“Now, dear, you’re coming to us for Christmas, it’s all 
fixed with Dumbledore, so we’ll see you quite soon,” 
said Mrs. Weasley through the window, as Harry 
slammed the door shut behind him and the train 



Page | 151 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




began to move. “You make sure you look after 
yourself and — ” 



The train was gathering speed. 

“ — be good and — ” 

She was jogging to keep up now. 
stay safe!” 

Harry waved until the train had turned a corner and 
Mr. and Mrs. Weasley were lost to view, then turned 
to see where the others had got to. He supposed Ron 
and Hermione were cloistered in the prefects’ 
carriage, but Ginny was a little way along the 
corridor, chatting to some friends. He made his way 
toward her, dragging his trunk. 

People stared shamelessly as he approached. They 
even pressed their faces against the windows of their 
compartments to get a look at him. He had expected 
an upswing in the amount of gaping and gawping he 
would have to endure this term after all the “Chosen 
One” rumors in the Daily Prophet, but he did not 
enjoy the sensation of standing in a very bright 
spotlight. He tapped Ginny on the shoulder. 

“Fancy trying to find a compartment?” 

“I can’t, Harry, I said I’d meet Dean,” said Ginny 
brightly. “See you later.” 

“Right,” said Harry. He felt a strange twinge of 
annoyance as she walked away, her long red hair 
dancing behind her; he had become so used to her 
presence over the summer that he had almost 
forgotten that Ginny did not hang around with him, 
Ron, and Hermione while at school. Then he blinked 
Page | 152 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




and looked around: He was surrounded by 
mesmerized girls. 

“Hi, Harry!” said a familiar voice from behind him. 

“Neville!” said Harry in relief, turning to see a round- 
faced boy struggling toward him. 

“Hello, Harry,” said a girl with long hair and large 
misty eyes, who was just behind Neville. 

“Luna, hi, how are you?” 

“Very well, thank you,” said Luna. She was clutching 
a magazine to her chest; large letters on the front 
announced that there was a pair of free Spectrespecs 
inside. 

“Quibbler still going strong, then?” asked Harry, who 
felt a certain fondness for the magazine, having given 
it an exclusive interview the previous year. 

“Oh yes, circulation’s well up,” said Luna happily. 

“Let’s find seats,” said Harry, and the three of them 
set off along the train through hordes of silently 
staring students. At last they found an empty 
compartment, and Harry hurried inside gratefully. 

“They’re even staring at us!” said Neville, indicating 
himself and Luna. “Because we’re with you!” 

“They’re staring at you because you were at the 
Ministry too,” said Harry, as he hoisted his trunk into 
the luggage rack. “Our little adventure there was all 
over the Daily Prophet, you must’ve seen it.” 

“Yes, I thought Gran would be angry about all the 
publicity,” said Neville, “but she was really pleased. 

Page | 153 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Says I’m starting to live up to my dad at long last. She 
bought me a new wand, look!” 



He pulled it out and showed it to Harry. 

“Cherry and unicorn hair,” he said proudly. “We think 
it was one of the last Ollivander ever sold, he 
vanished next day — oi, come back here, Trevor!” 

And he dived under the seat to retrieve his toad as it 
made one of its frequent bids for freedom. 

“Are we still doing D.A. meetings this year, Harry?” 
asked Luna, who was detaching a pair of psychedelic 
spectacles from the middle of The Quibbler. 

“No point now we’ve got rid of Umbridge, is there?” 
said Harry, sitting down. Neville bumped his head 
against the seat as he emerged from under it. He 
looked most disappointed. 

“I liked the D.A.! I learned loads with you!” 

“I enjoyed the meetings too,” said Luna serenely. “It 
was like having friends.” 

This was one of those uncomfortable things Luna 
often said and which made Harry feel a squirming 
mixture of pity and embarrassment. Before he could 
respond, however, there was a disturbance outside 
their compartment door; a group of fourth-year girls 
was whispering and giggling together on the other 
side of the glass. 

“You ask him!” 

“No, you!” 

“I’ll do it!” 

Page | 154 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




And one of them, a bold-looking girl with large dark 
eyes, a prominent chin, and long black hair pushed 
her way through the door. 

“Hi, Harry, I’m Romilda, Romilda Vane,” she said 
loudly and confidently. “Why don’t you join us in our 
compartment? You don’t have to sit with them,” she 
added in a stage whisper, indicating Neville’s bottom, 
which was sticking out from under the seat again as 
he groped around for Trevor, and Luna, who was now 
wearing her free Spectrespecs, which gave her the 
look of a demented, multicolored owl. 

“They’re friends of mine,” said Harry coldly. 

“Oh,” said the girl, looking very surprised. “Oh. 

Okay.” 

And she withdrew, sliding the door closed behind her. 

“People expect you to have cooler friends than us,” 
said Luna, once again displaying her knack for 
embarrassing honesty. 

“You are cool,” said Harry shortly. “None of them was 
at the Ministry. They didn’t fight with me.” 

“That’s a very nice thing to say,” beamed Luna. Then 
she pushed her Spectrespecs farther up her nose and 
settled down to read The Quibbler. 

“We didn’t face him, though,” said Neville, emerging 
from under the seat with fluff and dust in his hair 
and a resigned-looking Trevor in his hand. “You did. 
You should hear my gran talk about you. ‘That Harry 
Potter’s got more backbone than the whole Ministry of 
Magic put together*.’ She’d give anything to have you 
as a grandson. ...” 



Page | 155 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry laughed uncomfortably and changed the 
subject to O.W.L. results as soon as he could. While 
Neville recited his grades and wondered aloud 
whether he would be allowed to take a 
Transfiguration N.E.W.T. with only an “Acceptable,” 
Harry watched him without really listening. 

Neville’s childhood had been blighted by Voldemort 
just as much as Harry’s had, but Neville had no idea 
how close he had come to having Harry’s destiny. The 
prophecy could have referred to either of them, yet, 
for his own inscrutable reasons, Voldemort had 
chosen to believe that Harry was the one meant. 

Had Voldemort chosen Neville, it would be Neville 
sitting opposite Harry bearing the lightning-shaped 
scar and the weight of the prophecy. ... Or would it? 
Would Neville’s mother have died to save him, as Lily 
had died for Harry? Surely she would. ... But what if 
she had been unable to stand between her son and 
Voldemort? Would there then have been no “Chosen 
One” at all? An empty seat where Neville now sat and 
a scarless Harry who would have been kissed good- 
bye by his own mother, not Ron’s? 

“You all right, Harry? You look funny,” said Neville. 

Harry started. “Sorry — I — ” 

“Wrackspurt got you?” asked Luna sympathetically, 
peering at Harry through her enormous colored 
spectacles. 

“I — what?” 

“A Wrackspurt ... They’re invisible. They float in 
through your ears and make your brain go fuzzy,” she 
said. “I thought I felt one zooming around in here.” 



Page | 156 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




She flapped her hands at thin air, as though beating 
off large invisible moths. Harry and Neville caught 
each other’s eyes and hastily began to talk of 
Quidditch. 

The weather beyond the train windows was as patchy 
as it had been all summer; they passed through 
stretches of the chilling mist, then out into weak, 
clear sunlight. It was during one of the clear spells, 
when the sun was visible almost directly overhead, 
that Ron and Hermione entered the compartment at 
last. 

“Wish the lunch trolley would hurry up, I’m starving,” 
said Ron longingly, slumping into the seat beside 
Harry and rubbing his stomach. “Hi, Neville. Hi, 

Luna. Guess what?” he added, turning to Harry. 
“Malfoy’s not doing prefect duty. He’s just sitting in 
his compartment with the other Slytherins, we saw 
him when we passed.” 

Harry sat up straight, interested. It was not like 
Malfoy to pass up the chance to demonstrate his 
power as prefect, which he had happily abused all the 
previous year. 

“What did he do when he saw you?” 

“The usual,” said Ron indifferently, demonstrating a 
rude hand gesture. “Not like him, though, is it? Well 
— that is” — he did the hand gesture again — “but 
why isn’t he out there bullying first years? 

“Dunno,” said Harry, but his mind was racing. Didn’t 
this look as though Malfoy had more important things 
on his mind than bullying younger students? 



Page | 157 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Maybe he preferred the Inquisitorial Squad,” said 
Hermione. “Maybe being a prefect seems a bit tame 
after that.” 



“I don’t think so,” said Harry. “I think he’s — ” 

But before he could expound on his theory, the 
compartment door slid open again and a breathless 
third -year girl stepped inside. 

“I’m supposed to deliver these to Neville Longbottom 
and Harry P-Potter,” she faltered, as her eyes met 
Harry’s and she turned scarlet. She was holding out 
two scrolls of parchment tied with violet ribbon. 
Perplexed, Harry and Neville took the scroll addressed 
to each of them and the girl stumbled back out of the 
compartment. 

“What is it?” Ron demanded, as Harry unrolled his. 
“An invitation,” said Harry. 

Harry, 

I would be delighted if you would join me for a bite of 
lunch in compartment C. 

Sincerely, 

Professor H. E. F. Slug horn 

“Who’s Professor Slughorn?” asked Neville, looking 
perplexedly at his own invitation. 

“New teacher,” said Harry. “Well, I suppose we’ll have 
to go, won’t we?” 

“But what does he want me for?” asked Neville 
nervously, as though he was expecting detention. 

Page | 158 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No idea,” said Harry, which was not entirely true, 
though he had no proof yet that his hunch was 
correct. “Listen,” he added, seized by a sudden brain 
wave, “let’s go under the Invisibility Cloak, then we 
might get a good look at Malfoy on the way, see what 
he’s up to.” 

This idea, however, came to nothing: The corridors, 
which were packed with people on the lookout for the 
lunch trolley, were impossible to negotiate while 
wearing the cloak. Harry stowed it regretfully back in 
his bag, reflecting that it would have been nice to 
wear it just to avoid all the staring, which seemed to 
have increased in intensity even since he had last 
walked down the train. Every now and then, students 
would hurtle out of their compartments to get a better 
look at him. The exception was Cho Chang, who 
darted into her compartment when she saw Harry 
coming. As Harry passed the window, he saw her 
deep in determined conversation with her friend 
Marietta, who was wearing a very thick layer of 
makeup that did not entirely obscure the odd 
formation of pimples still etched across her face. 
Smirking slightly, Harry pushed on. 

When they reached compartment C, they saw at once 
that they were not Slughorn’s only invitees, although 
judging by the enthusiasm of Slughorn’s welcome, 
Harry was the most warmly anticipated. 

“Harry, m’boy!” said Slughorn, jumping up at the 
sight of him so that his great velvet-covered belly 
seemed to fill all the remaining space in the 
compartment. His shiny bald head and great silvery 
mustache gleamed as brightly in the sunlight as the 
golden buttons on his waistcoat. “Good to see you, 
good to see you! And you must be Mr. Longbottom!” 



Page | 159 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Neville nodded, looking scared. At a gesture from 
Slughorn, they sat down opposite each other in the 
only two empty seats, which were nearest the door. 
Harry glanced around at their fellow guests. He 
recognized a Slytherin from their year, a tall black boy 
with high cheekbones and long, slanting eyes; there 
were also two seventh-year boys Harry did not know 
and, squashed in the corner beside Slughorn and 
looking as though she was not entirely sure how she 
had got there, Ginny. 

“Now, do you know everyone?” Slughorn asked Harry 
and Neville. “Blaise Zabini is in your year, of course — 



Zabini did not make any sign of recognition or 
greeting, nor did Harry or Neville: Gryffindor and 
Slytherin students loathed each other on principle. 

“This is Cormac McLaggen, perhaps you’ve come 
across each other — ? No?” 

McLaggen, a large, wiry-haired youth, raised a hand, 
and Harry and Neville nodded back at him. 

“ — and this is Marcus Belby, I don’t know whether — 
?” 

Belby, who was thin and nervous-looking, gave a 
strained smile. 

“ — and this charming young lady tells me she knows 
you!” Slughorn finished. 

Ginny grimaced at Harry and Neville from behind 
Slughorn’s back. 

“Well now, this is most pleasant,” said Slughorn 
cozily. “A chance to get to know you all a little better. 

Page | 160 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Here, take a napkin. I’ve packed my own lunch; the 
trolley, as I remember it, is heavy on licorice wands, 
and a poor old man’s digestive system isn’t quite up 
to such things. ... Pheasant, Belby?” 

Belby started and accepted what looked like half a 
cold pheasant. 

“I was just telling young Marcus here that I had the 
pleasure of teaching his Uncle Damocles,” Slughorn 
told Harry and Neville, now passing around a basket 
of rolls. “Outstanding wizard, outstanding, and his 
Order of Merlin most well-deserved. Do you see much 
of your uncle, Marcus?” 

Unfortunately, Belby had just taken a large mouthful 
of pheasant; in his haste to answer Slughorn he 
swallowed too fast, turned purple, and began to 
choke. 

“Anapneo,” said Slughorn calmly, pointing his wand 
at Belby, whose airway seemed to clear at once. 

“Not ... not much of him, no,” gasped Belby, his eyes 
streaming. 

“Well, of course, I daresay he’s busy,” said Slughorn, 
looking questioningly at Belby. “I doubt he invented 
the Wolfsbane Potion without considerable hard 
work!” 

“I suppose ...” said Belby, who seemed afraid to take 
another bite of pheasant until he was sure that 
Slughorn had finished with him. “Er ... he and my 
dad don’t get on very well, you see, so I don’t really 
know much about ...” 

His voice tailed away as Slughorn gave him a cold 
smile and turned to McLaggen instead. 

Page | 161 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Now, you, Cormac,” said Slughorn, “I happen to 
know you see a lot of your Uncle Tiberius, because he 
has a rather splendid picture of the two of you 
hunting nogtails in, I think, Norfolk?” 

“Oh, yeah, that was fun, that was,” said McLaggen. 
“We went with Bertie Higgs and Rufus Scrimgeour — 
this was before he became Minister, obviously — ” 

“Ah, you know Bertie and Rufus too?” beamed 
Slughorn, now offering around a small tray of pies; 
somehow, Belby was missed out. “Now tell me ...” 

It was as Harry had suspected. Everyone here seemed 
to have been invited because they were connected to 
somebody well-known or influential — everyone 
except Ginny. Zabini, who was interrogated after 
McLaggen, turned out to have a famously beautiful 
witch for a mother (from what Harry could make out, 
she had been married seven times, each of her 
husbands dying mysteriously and leaving her mounds 
of gold). It was Neville’s turn next: This was a very 
uncomfortable ten minutes, for Neville’s parents, well- 
known Aurors, had been tortured into insanity by 
Bellatrix Lestrange and a couple of Death Eater 
cronies. At the end of Neville’s interview, Harry had 
the impression that Slughorn was reserving judgment 
on Neville, yet to see whether he had any of his 
parents’ flair. 

“And now,” said Slughorn, shifting massively in his 
seat with the air of a compere introducing his star 
act. “Harry Potter! Where to begin? I feel I barely 
scratched the surface when we met over the summer!” 
He contemplated Harry for a moment as though he 
was a particularly large and succulent piece of 
pheasant, then said, “ The Chosen One,’ they’re 
calling you now!” 



Page | 162 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry said nothing. Belby, McLaggen, and Zabini 
were all staring at him. 



“Of course,” said Slughorn, watching Harry closely, 
“there have been rumors for years. ... I remember 
when — well — after that terrible night — Lily — 
James — and you survived — and the word was that 
you must have powers beyond the ordinary — ” 

Zabini gave a tiny little cough that was clearly 
supposed to indicate amused skepticism. An angry 
voice burst out from behind Slughorn. 

“Yeah, Zabini, because you’re so talented ... at posing. 



“Oh dear!” chuckled Slughorn comfortably, looking 
around at Ginny, who was glaring at Zabini around 
Slughorn ’s great belly. “You want to be careful, Blaise! 
I saw this young lady perform the most marvelous 
Bat-Bogey Hex as I was passing her carriage! I 
wouldn’t cross her!” 

Zabini merely looked contemptuous. 

“Anyway,” said Slughorn, turning back to Harry. 

“Such rumors this summer. Of course, one doesn’t 
know what to believe, the Prophet has been known to 
print inaccuracies, make mistakes — but there seems 
little doubt, given the number of witnesses, that there 
was quite a disturbance at the Ministry and that you 
were there in the thick of it all!” 

Harry, who could not see any way out of this without 
flatly lying, nodded but still said nothing. Slughorn 
beamed at him. 

“So modest, so modest, no wonder Dumbledore is so 
fond — you were there, then? But the rest of the 

Page | 163 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




stories — so sensational, of course, one doesn’t know 
quite what to believe — this fabled prophecy, for 
instance — ” 

“We never heard a prophecy,” said Neville, turning 
geranium pink as he said it. 

“That’s right,” said Ginny staunchly. “Neville and I 
were both there too, and all this ‘Chosen One’ rubbish 
is just the Prophet making things up as usual.” 

“You were both there too, were you?” said Slughorn 
with great interest, looking from Ginny to Neville, but 
both of them sat clamlike before his encouraging 
smile. 

“Yes . . . well ... it is true that the Prophet often 
exaggerates, of course. ...” Slughorn said, sounding a 
little disappointed. “I remember dear Gwenog telling 
me (Gwenog Jones, I mean, of course, Captain of the 
Holyhead Harpies) — ” 

He meandered off into a long-winded reminiscence, 
but Harry had the distinct impression that Slughorn 
had not finished with him, and that he had not been 
convinced by Neville and Ginny. 

The afternoon wore on with more anecdotes about 
illustrious wizards Slughorn had taught, all of whom 
had been delighted to join what he called the “Slug 
Club” at Hogwarts. Harry could not wait to leave, but 
couldn’t see how to do so politely. Finally the train 
emerged from yet another long misty stretch into a 
red sunset, and Slughorn looked around, blinking in 
the twilight. 

“Good gracious, it’s getting dark already! I didn’t 
notice that they’d lit the lamps! You’d better go and 
change into your robes, all of you. McLaggen, you 

Page | 164 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




must drop by and borrow that book on nogtails. 

Harry, Blaise — any time you’re passing. Same goes 
for you, miss,” he twinkled at Ginny. “Well, off you go, 
off you go!” 

As he pushed past Harry into the darkening corridor, 
Zabini shot him a filthy look that Harry returned with 
interest. He, Ginny, and Neville followed Zabini back 
along the train. 

“I’m glad that’s over,” muttered Neville. “Strange man, 
isn’t he?” 

“Yeah, he is a bit,” said Harry, his eyes on Zabini. 
“How come you ended up in there, Ginny?” 

“He saw me hex Zacharias Smith,” said Ginny. “You 
remember that idiot from Hufflepuff who was in the 
D.A.? He kept on and on asking about what happened 
at the Ministry and in the end he annoyed me so 
much I hexed him — when Slughorn came in I 
thought I was going to get detention, but he just 
thought it was a really good hex and invited me to 
lunch! Mad, eh?” 

“Better reason for inviting someone than because 
their mother’s famous,” said Harry, scowling at the 
back of Zabini ’s head, “or because their uncle — ” 

But he broke off. An idea had just occurred to him, a 
reckless but potentially wonderful idea. ... In a 
minute’s time, Zabini was going to reenter the 
Slytherin sixth-year compartment and Malfoy would 
be sitting there, thinking himself unheard by anybody 
except fellow Slytherins. ... If Harry could only enter, 
unseen, behind him, what might he not see or hear? 
True, there was little of the journey left — Hogsmeade 
Station had to be less than half an hour away, 
judging by the wildness of the scenery flashing by the 
Page | 165 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




windows — but nobody else seemed prepared to take 
Harry’s suspicions seriously, so it was down to him to 
prove them. 

“I’ll see you two later,” said Harry under his breath, 
pulling out his Invisibility Cloak and flinging it over 
himself. 

“But what’re you — ?” asked Neville. 

“Later!” whispered Harry, darting after Zabini as 
quietly as possible, though the rattling of the train 
made such caution almost pointless. 

The corridors were almost completely empty now. 
Nearly everyone had returned to their carriages to 
change into their school robes and pack up their 
possessions. Though he was as close as he could get 
to Zabini without touching him, Harry was not quick 
enough to slip into the compartment when Zabini 
opened the door. Zabini was already sliding it shut 
when Harry hastily stuck out his foot to prevent it 
closing. 

“What’s wrong with this thing?” said Zabini angrily as 
he smashed the sliding door repeatedly into Harry’s 
foot. 

Harry seized the door and pushed it open, hard; 
Zabini, still clinging on to the handle, toppled over 
sideways into Gregory Goyle’s lap, and in the ensuing 
ruckus, Harry darted into the compartment, leapt 
onto Zabini’s temporarily empty seat, and hoisted 
himself up into the luggage rack. It was fortunate that 
Goyle and Zabini were snarling at each other, drawing 
all eyes onto them, for Harry was quite sure his feet 
and ankles had been revealed as the cloak had 
flapped around them; indeed, for one horrible 
moment he thought he saw Malfoy’s eyes follow his 
Page | 166 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




trainer as it whipped upward out of sight. But then 
Goyle slammed the door shut and flung Zabini off 
him; Zabini collapsed into his own seat looking 
ruffled, Vincent Crabbe returned to his comic, and 
Malfoy, sniggering, lay back down across two seats 
with his head in Pansy Parkinson’s lap. Harry lay 
curled uncomfortably under the cloak to ensure that 
every inch of him remained hidden, and watched 
Pansy stroke the sleek blond hair off Malfoy’s 
forehead, smirking as she did so, as though anyone 
would have loved to have been in her place. The 
lanterns swinging from the carriage ceiling cast a 
bright light over the scene: Harry could read every 
word of Crabbe’s comic directly below him. 

“So, Zabini,” said Malfoy, “what did Slughorn want?” 

“Just trying to make up to well-connected people,” 
said Zabini, who was still glowering at Goyle. “Not 
that he managed to find many.” 

This information did not seem to please Malfoy. 

“Who else had he invited?” he demanded. 

“McLaggen from Gryffindor,” said Zabini. 

“Oh yeah, his uncle’s big in the Ministry,” said 
Malfoy. 

“ — someone else called Belby, from Ravenclaw — ” 

“Not him, he’s a prat!” said Pansy. 

“ — and Longbottom, Potter, and that Weasley girl,” 
finished Zabini. 

Malfoy sat up very suddenly, knocking Pansy’s hand 
aside. 

Page | 167 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“He invited Longbottom?” 

“Well, I assume so, as Longbottom was there,” said 
Zabini indifferently. 

“What’s Longbottom got to interest Slughorn?” 

Zabini shrugged. 

“Potter, precious Potter, obviously he wanted a look at 
‘the Chosen One,’ ” sneered Malfoy, “but that Weasley 
girl! What’s so special about her?” 

“A lot of boys like her,” said Pansy, watching Malfoy 
out of the corner of her eyes for his reaction. “Even 
you think she’s good-looking, don’t you, Blaise, and 
we all know how hard you are to please!” 

“I wouldn’t touch a filthy little blood traitor like her 
whatever she looked like,” said Zabini coldly, and 
Pansy looked pleased. Malfoy sank back across her 
lap and allowed her to resume the stroking of his 
hair. 

“Well, I pity Slughorn’s taste. Maybe he’s going a bit 
senile. Shame, my father always said he was a good 
wizard in his day. My father used to be a bit of a 
favorite of his. Slughorn probably hasn’t heard I’m on 
the train, or — ” 

“I wouldn’t bank on an invitation,” said Zabini. “He 
asked me about Nott’s father when I first arrived. 

They used to be old friends, apparently, but when he 
heard he’d been caught at the Ministry he didn’t look 
happy, and Nott didn’t get an invitation, did he? I 
don’t think Slughorn’s interested in Death Eaters.” 

Malfoy looked angry, but forced out a singularly 
humorless laugh. 

Page | 168 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, who cares what he’s interested in? What is he, 
when you come down to it? Just some stupid 
teacher.” Malfoy yawned ostentatiously. “I mean, I 
might not even be at Hogwarts next year, what’s it 
matter to me if some fat old has-been likes me or 
not?” 

“What do you mean, you might not be at Hogwarts 
next year?” said Pansy indignantly, ceasing grooming 
Malfoy at once. 

“Well, you never know,” said Malfoy with the ghost of 
a smirk. “I might have — er — moved on to bigger and 
better things.” 

Crouched in the luggage rack under his cloak, Harry’s 
heart began to race. What would Ron and Hermione 
say about this? Crabbe and Goyle were gawping at 
Malfoy; apparently they had had no inkling of any 
plans to move on to bigger and better things. Even 
Zabini had allowed a look of curiosity to mar his 
haughty features. Pansy resumed the slow stroking of 
Malfoy’s hair, looking dumbfounded. 

“Do you mean — Him?” 

Malfoy shrugged. 

“Mother wants me to complete my education, but 
personally, I don’t see it as that important these days. 
I mean, think about it. ... When the Dark Lord takes 
over, is he going to care how many O.W.L.s or 
N.E.W.T.s anyone’s got? Of course he isn’t. ... It’ll be 
all about the kind of service he received, the level of 
devotion he was shown.” 

“And you think you’ll be able to do something for 
him?” asked Zabini scathingly. “Sixteen years old and 
not even fully qualified yet?” 

Page | 169 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I’ve just said, haven’t I? Maybe he doesn’t care if I’m 
qualified. Maybe the job he wants me to do isn’t 
something that you need to be qualified for,” said 
Malfoy quietly. 

Crabbe and Goyle were both sitting with their mouths 
open like gargoyles. Pansy was gazing down at Malfoy 
as though she had never seen anything so awe- 
inspiring. 

“I can see Hogwarts,” said Malfoy, clearly relishing the 
effect he had created as he pointed out of the 
blackened window. “We’d better get our robes on.” 

Harry was so busy staring at Malfoy, he did not notice 
Goyle reaching up for his trunk; as he swung it down, 
it hit Harry hard on the side of the head. He let out an 
involuntary gasp of pain, and Malfoy looked up at the 
luggage rack, frowning. 

Harry was not afraid of Malfoy, but he still did not 
much like the idea of being discovered hiding under 
his Invisibility Cloak by a group of unfriendly 
Slytherins. Eyes still watering and head still 
throbbing, he drew his wand, careful not to 
disarrange the cloak, and waited, breath held. To his 
relief, Malfoy seemed to decide that he had imagined 
the noise; he pulled on his robes like the others, 
locked his trunk, and as the train slowed to a jerky 
crawl, fastened a thick new traveling cloak round his 
neck. 

Harry could see the corridors filling up again and 
hoped that Hermione and Ron would take his things 
out onto the platform for him; he was stuck where he 
was until the compartment had quite emptied. At last, 
with a final lurch, the train came to a complete halt. 
Goyle threw the door open and muscled his way out 



Page | 170 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




into a crowd of second years, punching them aside; 
Crabbe and Zabini followed. 

“You go on,” Malfoy told Pansy, who was waiting for 
him with her hand held out as though hoping he 
would hold it. “I just want to check something.” 

Pansy left. Now Harry and Malfoy were alone in the 
compartment. People were filing past, descending 
onto the dark platform. Malfoy moved over to the 
compartment door and let down the blinds, so that 
people in the corridor beyond could not peer in. He 
then bent down over his trunk and opened it again. 

Harry peered down over the edge of the luggage rack, 
his heart pumping a little faster. What had Malfoy 
wanted to hide from Pansy? Was he about to see the 
mysterious broken object it was so important to 
mend? 

“Petrificus Totalusl” 

Without warning, Malfoy pointed his wand at Harry, 
who was instantly paralyzed. As though in slow 
motion, he toppled out of the luggage rack and fell, 
with an agonizing, floor-shaking crash, at Malfoy’s 
feet, the Invisibility Cloak trapped beneath him, his 
whole body revealed with his legs still curled absurdly 
into the cramped kneeling position. He couldn’t move 
a muscle; he could only gaze up at Malfoy, who 
smiled broadly. 

“I thought so,” he said jubilantly. “I heard Goyle’s 
trunk hit you. And I thought I saw something white 
flash through the air after Zabini came back. ...” 

His eyes lingered for a moment upon Harry’s trainers. 



Page | 171 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You didn’t hear anything I care about, Potter. But 
while I’ve got you here ...” 

And he stamped, hard, on Harry’s face. Harry felt his 
nose break; blood spurted everywhere. 

“That’s from my father. Now, let’s see. ...” 

Malfoy dragged the cloak out from under Harry’s 
immobilized body and threw it over him. 

“I don’t reckon they’ll find you till the train’s back in 
London,” he said quietly. “See you around, Potter ... 
or not.” 

And taking care to tread on Harry’s fingers, Malfoy 
left the compartment. 



Page | 172 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






SNAPE VICTORIOUS 

Harry could not move a muscle. He lay there beneath 
the Invisibility Cloak feeling the blood from his nose 
flow, hot and wet, over his face, listening to the voices 
and footsteps in the corridor beyond. His immediate 
thought was that someone, surely, would check the 
compartments before the train departed again. But at 
once came the dispiriting realization that even if 
somebody looked into the compartment, he would be 
neither seen nor heard. His best hope was that 
somebody else would walk in and step on him. 

Harry had never hated Malfoy more than as he lay 
there, like an absurd turtle on its back, blood 
dripping sickeningly into his open mouth. What a 
stupid situation to have landed himself in . . . and now 
the last few footsteps were dying away; everyone was 
shuffling along the dark platform outside; he could 
hear the scraping of trunks and the loud babble of 
talk. 



Page | 173 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



Ron and Hermione would think that he had left the 
train without them. Once they arrived at Hogwarts 
and took their places in the Great Hall, looked up and 
down the Gryffindor table a few times, and finally 
realized that he was not there, he, no doubt, would be 
halfway back to London. 

He tried to make a sound, even a grunt, but it was 
impossible. Then he remembered that some wizards, 
like Dumbledore, could perform spells without 
speaking, so he tried to summon his wand, which had 
fallen out of his hand, by saying the words “Accio 
Wand\” over and over again in his head, but nothing 
happened. 

He thought he could hear the rustling of the trees 
that surrounded the lake, and the far-off hoot of an 
owl, but no hint of a search being made or even (he 
despised himself slightly for hoping it) panicked 
voices wondering where Harry Potter had gone. A 
feeling of hopelessness spread through him as he 
imagined the convoy of thestral-drawn carriages 
trundling up to the school and the muffled yells of 
laughter issuing from whichever carriage Malfoy was 
riding in, where he could be recounting his attack on 
Harry to Crabbe, Goyle, Zabini, and Pansy Parkinson. 

The train lurched, causing Harry to roll over onto his 
side. Now he was staring at the dusty underside of 
the seats instead of the ceiling. The floor began to 
vibrate as the engine roared into life. The Express was 
leaving and nobody knew he was still on it. ... 

Then he felt his Invisibility Cloak fly off him and a 
voice overhead said, “Wotcher, Harry.” 

There was a flash of red light and Harry’s body 
unfroze; he was able to push himself into a more 
dignified sitting position, hastily wipe the blood off his 

Page | 174 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




bruised face with the back of his hand, and raise his 
head to look up at Tonks, who was holding the 
Invisibility Cloak she had just pulled away. 

“We’d better get out of here, quickly,” she said, as the 
train windows became obscured with steam and they 
began to move out of the station. “Come on, we’ll 
jump.” 

Harry hurried after her into the corridor. She pulled 
open the train door and leapt onto the platform, 
which seemed to be sliding underneath them as the 
train gathered momentum. He followed her, staggered 
a little on landing, then straightened up in time to see 
the gleaming scarlet steam engine pick up speed, 
round the corner, and disappear from view. 

The cold night air was soothing on his throbbing 
nose. Tonks was looking at him; he felt angry and 
embarrassed that he had been discovered in such a 
ridiculous position. Silently she handed him back the 
Invisibility Cloak. 

“Who did it?” 

“Draco Malfoy,” said Harry bitterly. “Thanks for ... 
well ...” 

“No problem,” said Tonks, without smiling. From 
what Harry could see in the darkness, she was as 
mousy-haired and miserable-looking as she had been 
when he had met her at the Burrow. “I can fix your 
nose if you stand still.” 

Harry did not think much of this idea; he had been 
intending to visit Madam Pomfrey, the matron, in 
whom he had a little more confidence when it came to 
Healing Spells, but it seemed rude to say this, so he 
stayed stock-still and closed his eyes. 

Page | 175 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Episkey,” said Tonks. 



Harry’s nose felt very hot, and then very cold. He 
raised a hand and felt it gingerly. It seemed to be 
mended. 

“Thanks a lot!” 

“You’d better put that cloak back on, and we can walk 
up to the school,” said Tonks, still unsmiling. As 
Harry swung the cloak back over himself, she waved 
her wand; an immense silvery four-legged creature 
erupted from it and streaked off into the darkness. 

“Was that a Patronus?” asked Harry, who had seen 
Dumbledore send messages like this. 

“Yes, I’m sending word to the castle that I’ve got you 
or they’ll worry. Come on, we’d better not dawdle.” 

They set off toward the lane that led to the school. 

“How did you find me?” 

“I noticed you hadn’t left the train and I knew you 
had that cloak. I thought you might be hiding for 
some reason. When I saw the blinds were drawn 
down on that compartment I thought I’d check.” 

“But what are you doing here, anyway?” Harry asked. 

“I’m stationed in Hogsmeade now, to give the school 
extra protection,” said Tonks. 

“Is it just you who’s stationed up here, or — ?” 

“No, Proudfoot, Savage, and Dawlish are here too.” 

“Dawlish, that Auror Dumbledore attacked last year?” 

Page | 176 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“That’s right.” 



They trudged up the dark, deserted lane, following the 
freshly made carriage tracks. Harry looked sideways 
at Tonks under his cloak. Last year she had been 
inquisitive (to the point of being a little annoying at 
times), she had laughed easily, she had made jokes. 
Now she seemed older and much more serious and 
purposeful. Was this all the effect of what had 
happened at the Ministry? He reflected uncomfortably 
that Hermione would have suggested he say 
something consoling about Sirius to her, that it 
hadn’t been her fault at all, but he couldn’t bring 
himself to do it. He was far from blaming her for 
Sirius’s death; it was no more her fault than anyone 
else’s (and much less than his), but he did not like 
talking about Sirius if he could avoid it. And so they 
tramped on through the cold night in silence, Tonks ’s 
long cloak whispering on the ground behind them. 

Having always traveled there by carriage, Harry had 
never before appreciated just how far Hogwarts was 
from Hogsmeade Station. With great relief he finally 
saw the tall pillars on either side of the gates, each 
topped with a winged boar. He was cold, he was 
hungry, and he was quite keen to leave this new, 
gloomy Tonks behind. But when he put out a hand to 
push open the gates, he found them chained shut. 

“Alohomora\” he said confidently, pointing his wand at 
the padlock, but nothing happened. 

“That won’t work on these,” said Tonks. “Dumbledore 
bewitched them himself.” 

Harry looked around. 

“I could climb a wall,” he suggested. 



Page | 177 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No, you couldn’t,” said Tonks flatly. “Anti-intruder 
jinxes on all of them. Security’s been tightened a 
hundredfold this summer.” 

“Well then,” said Harry, starting to feel annoyed at her 
lack of helpfulness, “I suppose I’ll just have to sleep 
out here and wait for morning.” 

“Someone’s coming down for you,” said Tonks. “Look.” 

A lantern was bobbing at the distant foot of the 
castle. Harry was so pleased to see it he felt he could 
even endure Filch’s wheezy criticisms of his tardiness 
and rants about how his timekeeping would improve 
with the regular application of thumbscrews. It was 
not until the glowing yellow light was ten feet away 
from them, and Harry had pulled off his Invisibility 
Cloak so that he could be seen, that he recognized, 
with a rush of pure loathing, the uplit hooked nose 
and long, black, greasy hair of Severus Snape. 

“Well, well, well,” sneered Snape, taking out his wand 
and tapping the padlock once, so that the chains 
snaked backward and the gates creaked open. “Nice 
of you to turn up, Potter, although you have evidently 
decided that the wearing of school robes would 
detract from your appearance.” 

“I couldn’t change, I didn’t have my — ” Harry began, 
but Snape cut across him. 

“There is no need to wait, Nymphadora, Potter is quite 
— ah — safe in my hands.” 

“I meant Hagrid to get the message,” said Tonks, 
frowning. 

“Hagrid was late for the start-of-term feast, just like 
Potter here, so I took it instead. And incidentally,” 

Page | 178 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




said Snape, standing back to allow Harry to pass him, 
“I was interested to see your new Patronus.” 

He shut the gates in her face with a loud clang and 
tapped the chains with his wand again, so that they 
slithered, clinking, back into place. 

“I think you were better off with the old one,” said 
Snape, the malice in his voice unmistakable. “The 
new one looks weak.” 

As Snape swung the lantern about, Harry saw, 
fleetingly, a look of shock and anger on Tonks’s face. 
Then she was covered in darkness once more. 

“Good night,” Harry called to her over his shoulder, as 
he began the walk up to the school with Snape. 
“Thanks for ... everything.” 

“See you, Harry.” 

Snape did not speak for a minute or so. Harry felt as 
though his body was generating waves of hatred so 
powerful that it seemed incredible that Snape could 
not feel them burning him. He had loathed Snape 
from their first encounter, but Snape had placed 
himself forever and irrevocably beyond the possibility 
of Harry’s forgiveness by his attitude toward Sirius. 
Whatever Dumbledore said, Harry had had time to 
think over the summer, and had concluded that 
Snape ’s snide remarks to Sirius about remaining 
safely hidden while the rest of the Order of the 
Phoenix were off fighting Voldemort had probably 
been a powerful factor in Sirius rushing off to the 
Ministry the night that he had died. Harry clung to 
this notion, because it enabled him to blame Snape, 
which felt satisfying, and also because he knew that if 
anyone was not sorry that Sirius was dead, it was the 
man now striding next to him in the darkness. 

Page | 179 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Fifty points from Gryffindor for lateness, I think,” 
said Snape. “And, let me see, another twenty for your 
Muggle attire. You know, I don’t believe any House 
has ever been in negative figures this early in the 
term: We haven’t even started pudding. You might 
have set a record, Potter.” 

The fury and hatred bubbling inside Harry seemed to 
blaze white-hot, but he would rather have been 
immobilized all the way back to London than tell 
Snape why he was late. 

“I suppose you wanted to make an entrance, did 
you?” Snape continued. “And with no flying car 
available you decided that bursting into the Great 
Hall halfway through the feast ought to create a 
dramatic effect.” 

Still Harry remained silent, though he thought his 
chest might explode. He knew that Snape had come 
to fetch him for this, for the few minutes when he 
could needle and torment Harry without anyone else 
listening. 

They reached the castle steps at last and as the great 
oaken front doors swung open into the vast flagged 
entrance hall, a burst of talk and laughter and of 
tinkling plates and glasses greeted them through the 
doors standing open into the Great Hall. Harry 
wondered whether he could slip his Invisibility Cloak 
back on, thereby gaining his seat at the long 
Gryffindor table (which, inconveniently, was the 
farthest from the entrance hall) without being noticed. 
As though he had read Harry’s mind, however, Snape 
said, “No cloak. You can walk in so that everyone sees 
you, which is what you wanted, I’m sure.” 

Harry turned on the spot and marched straight 
through the open doors: anything to get away from 

Page | 180 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Snape. The Great Hall, with its four long House tables 
and its staff table set at the top of the room, was 
decorated as usual with floating candles that made 
the plates below glitter and glow. It was all a 
shimmering blur to Harry, however, who walked so 
fast that he was passing the Hufflepuff table before 
people really started to stare, and by the time they 
were standing up to get a good look at him, he had 
spotted Ron and Hermione, sped along the benches 
toward them, and forced his way in between them. 

“Where’ve you — blimey, what’ve you done to your 
face?” said Ron, goggling at him along with everyone 
else in the vicinity. 

“Why, what’s wrong with it?” said Harry, grabbing a 
spoon and squinting at his distorted reflection. 

“You’re covered in blood!” said Hermione. “Come here 



She raised her wand, said “Tergeol” and siphoned off 
the dried blood. 

“Thanks,” said Harry, feeling his now clean face. 
“How’s my nose looking?” 

“Normal,” said Hermione anxiously. “Why shouldn’t 
it? Harry, what happened? We’ve been terrified!” 

“I’ll tell you later,” said Harry curtly. He was very 
conscious that Ginny, Neville, Dean, and Seamus 
were listening in; even Nearly Headless Nick, the 
Gryffindor ghost, had come floating along the bench 
to eavesdrop. 

“But — ” said Hermione. 



Page | 181 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Not now, Hermione,” said Harry, in a darkly 
significant voice. He hoped very much that they would 
all assume he had been involved in something heroic, 
preferably involving a couple of Death Eaters and a 
dementor. Of course, Malfoy would spread the story 
as far and wide as he could, but there was always a 
chance it wouldn’t reach too many Gryffindor ears. 

He reached across Ron for a couple of chicken legs 
and a handful of chips, but before he could take them 
they vanished, to be replaced with puddings. 

“You missed the Sorting, anyway,” said Hermione, as 
Ron dived for a large chocolate gateau. 

“Hat say anything interesting?” asked Harry, taking a 
piece of treacle tart. 

“More of the same, really ... advising us all to unite in 
the face of our enemies, you know.” 

“Dumbledore mentioned Voldemort at all?” 

“Not yet, but he always saves his proper speech for 
after the feast, doesn’t he? It can’t be long now.” 

“Snape said Hagrid was late for the feast — ” 

“You’ve seen Snape? How come?” said Ron between 
frenzied mouthfuls of gateau. 

“Bumped into him,” said Harry evasively. 

“Hagrid was only a few minutes late,” said Hermione. 
“Look, he’s waving at you, Harry.” 

Harry looked up at the staff table and grinned at 
Hagrid, who was indeed waving at him. Hagrid had 
never quite managed to comport himself with the 

Page | 182 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




dignity of Professor McGonagall, Head of Gryffindor 
House, the top of whose head came up to somewhere 
between Hagrid’s elbow and shoulder as they were 
sitting side by side, and who was looking 
disapprovingly at this enthusiastic greeting. Harry 
was surprised to see the Divination teacher, Professor 
Trelawney, sitting on Hagrid’s other side; she rarely 
left her tower room, and he had never seen her at the 
start-of-term feast before. She looked as odd as ever, 
glittering with beads and trailing shawls, her eyes 
magnified to enormous size by her spectacles. Having 
always considered her a bit of a fraud, Harry had 
been shocked to discover at the end of the previous 
term that it had been she who had made the 
prediction that caused Lord Voldemort to kill Harry’s 
parents and attack Harry himself. The knowledge had 
made him even less eager to find himself in her 
company, but thankfully, this year he would be 
dropping Divination. Her great beaconlike eyes 
swiveled in his direction; he hastily looked away 
toward the Slytherin table. Draco Malfoy was miming 
the shattering of a nose to raucous laughter and 
applause. Harry dropped his gaze to his treacle tart, 
his insides burning again. What he would not give to 
fight Malfoy one-on-one . . . 

“So what did Professor Slughorn want?” Hermione 
asked. 

“To know what really happened at the Ministry,” said 
Harry. 

“Him and everyone else here,” sniffed Hermione. 
“People were interrogating us about it on the train, 
weren’t they, Ron?” 

“Yeah,” said Ron. “All wanting to know if you really 
are ‘the Chosen One’ — ” 



Page | 183 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“There has been much talk on that very subject even 
amongst the ghosts,” interrupted Nearly Headless 
Nick, inclining his barely connected head toward 
Harry so that it wobbled dangerously on its ruff. “I am 
considered something of a Potter authority; it is 
widely known that we are friendly. I have assured the 
spirit community that I will not pester you for 
information, however. ‘Harry Potter knows that he 
can confide in me with complete confidence/ I told 
them. ‘I would rather die than betray his trust.’ ” 

“That’s not saying much, seeing as you’re already 
dead,” Ron observed. 

“Once again, you show all the sensitivity of a blunt 
axe,” said Nearly Headless Nick in affronted tones, 
and he rose into the air and glided back toward the 
far end of the Gryffindor table just as Dumbledore got 
to his feet at the staff table. The talk and laughter 
echoing around the Hall died away almost instantly. 

“The very best of evenings to you!” he said, smiling 
broadly, his arms opened wide as though to embrace 
the whole room. 

“What happened to his hand?” gasped Hermione. 

She was not the only one who had noticed. 
Dumbledore ’s right hand was as blackened and dead- 
looking as it had been on the night he had come to 
fetch Harry from the Dursleys. Whispers swept the 
room; Dumbledore, interpreting them correctly, 
merely smiled and shook his purple-and-gold sleeve 
over his injury. 

“Nothing to worry about,” he said airily. “Now ... to 
our new students, welcome, to our old students, 
welcome back! Another year full of magical education 
awaits you ...” 

Page | 184 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“His hand was like that when I saw him over the 
summer,” Harry whispered to Hermione. “I thought 
he’d have cured it by now, though ... or Madam 
Pomfrey would’ve done.” 

“It looks as if it’s died,” said Hermione, with a 
nauseated expression. “But there are some injuries 
you can’t cure ... old curses ... and there are poisons 
without antidotes. ...” 

"... and Mr. Filch, our caretaker, has asked me to say 
that there is a blanket ban on any joke items bought 
at the shop called Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes. 

“Those wishing to play for their House Quidditch 
teams should give their names to their Heads of 
House as usual. We are also looking for new 
Quidditch commentators, who should do likewise. 

“We are pleased to welcome a new member of staff 
this year. Professor Slughorn” — Slughorn stood up, 
his bald head gleaming in the candlelight, his big 
waistcoated belly casting the table below into shadow 
— “is a former colleague of mine who has agreed to 
resume his old post of Potions master.” 

“Potions?” 

“Potions?” 

The word echoed all over the Hall as people wondered 
whether they had heard right. 

“Potions?” said Ron and Hermione together, turning 
to stare at Harry. “But you said — ” 

“Professor Snape, meanwhile,” said Dumbledore, 
raising his voice so that it carried over all the 



Page | 185 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




muttering, “will be taking over the position of Defense 
Against the Dark Arts teacher.” 



“No!” said Harry, so loudly that many heads turned in 
his direction. He did not care; he was staring up at 
the staff table, incensed. How could Snape be given 
the Defense Against the Dark Arts job after all this 
time? Hadn’t it been widely known for years that 
Dumbledore did not trust him to do it? 

“But Harry, you said that Slughorn was going to be 
teaching Defense Against the Dark Arts!” said 
Hermione. 

“I thought he was!” said Harry, racking his brains to 
remember when Dumbledore had told him this, but 
now that he came to think of it, he was unable to 
recall Dumbledore ever telling him what Slughorn 
would be teaching. 

Snape, who was sitting on Dumbledore’s right, did 
not stand up at the mention of his name; he merely 
raised a hand in lazy acknowledgment of the applause 
from the Slytherin table, yet Harry was sure he could 
detect a look of triumph on the features he loathed so 
much. 

“Well, there’s one good thing,” he said savagely. 

“Snape ’ll be gone by the end of the year.” 

“What do you mean?” asked Ron. 

“That job’s jinxed. No one’s lasted more than a year. 

... Quirrell actually died doing it. ... Personally, I’m 
going to keep my fingers crossed for another death. 



“Harry!” said Hermione, shocked and reproachful. 

Page | 186 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“He might just go back to teaching Potions at the end 
of the year,” said Ron reasonably. “That Slughorn 
bloke might not want to stay long-term. Moody 
didn’t.” 

Dumbledore cleared his throat. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione were not the only ones who had been 
talking; the whole Hall had erupted in a buzz of 
conversation at the news that Snape had finally 
achieved his heart’s desire. Seemingly oblivious to the 
sensational nature of the news he had just imparted, 
Dumbledore said nothing more about staff 
appointments, but waited a few seconds to ensure 
that the silence was absolute before continuing. 

“Now, as everybody in this Hall knows, Lord 
Voldemort and his followers are once more at large 
and gaining in strength.” 

The silence seemed to tauten and strain as 
Dumbledore spoke. Harry glanced at Malfoy. Malfoy 
was not looking at Dumbledore, but making his fork 
hover in midair with his wand, as though he found 
the headmaster’s words unworthy of his attention. 

“I cannot emphasize strongly enough how dangerous 
the present situation is, and how much care each of 
us at Hogwarts must take to ensure that we remain 
safe. The castle’s magical fortifications have been 
strengthened over the summer, we are protected in 
new and more powerful ways, but we must still guard 
scrupulously against carelessness on the part of any 
student or member of staff. I urge you, therefore, to 
abide by any security restrictions that your teachers 
might impose upon you, however irksome you might 
find them — in particular, the rule that you are not to 
be out of bed after hours. I implore you, should you 
notice anything strange or suspicious within or 
outside the castle, to report it to a member of staff 
Page | 187 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




immediately. I trust you to conduct yourselves, 
always, with the utmost regard for your own and 
others’ safety.” 

Dumbledore’s blue eyes swept over the students 
before he smiled once more. 

“But now, your beds await, as warm and comfortable 
as you could possibly wish, and I know that your top 
priority is to be well-rested for your lessons tomorrow. 
Let us therefore say good night. Pip pip!” 

With the usual deafening scraping noise, the benches 
were moved back and the hundreds of students began 
to file out of the Great Hall toward their dormitories. 
Harry, who was in no hurry at all to leave with the 
gawping crowd, nor to get near enough to Malfoy to 
allow him to retell the story of the nose-stamping, 
lagged behind, pretending to retie the lace on his 
trainer, allowing most of the Gryffindors to draw 
ahead of him. Hermione had darted ahead to fulfill 
her prefect’s duty of shepherding the first years, but 
Ron remained with Harry. 

“What really happened to your nose?” he asked, once 
they were at the very back of the throng pressing out 
of the Hall, and out of earshot of anyone else. 

Harry told him. It was a mark of the strength of their 
friendship that Ron did not laugh. 

“I saw Malfoy miming something to do with a nose,” 
he said darkly. 

“Yeah, well, never mind that,” said Harry bitterly. 
“Listen to what he was saying before he found out I 
was there. ...” 



Page | 188 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry had expected Ron to be stunned by Malfoy’s 
boasts. With what Harry considered pure 
pigheadedness, however, Ron was unimpressed. 

“Come on, Harry, he was just showing off for 
Parkinson. ... What kind of mission would You-Know- 
Who have given him?” 

“How d’you know Voldemort doesn’t need someone at 
Hogwarts? It wouldn’t be the first — ” 

“I wish yeh’d stop sayin’ tha’ name, Harry,” said a 
reproachful voice behind them. Harry looked over his 
shoulder to see Hagrid shaking his head. 

“Dumbledore uses that name,” said Harry stubbornly. 

“Yeah, well, tha’s Dumbledore, innit?” said Hagrid 
mysteriously. “So how come yeh were late, Harry? I 
was worried.” 

“Got held up on the train,” said Harry. “Why were you 
late?” 

“I was with Grawp,” said Hagrid happily. “Los’ track o’ 
the time. He’s got a new home up in the mountains 
now, Dumbledore fixed it — nice big cave. He’s much 
happier than he was in the forest. We were havin’ a 
good chat.” 

“Really?” said Harry, taking care not to catch Ron’s 
eye; the last time he had met Hagrid’s half-brother, a 
vicious giant with a talent for ripping up trees by the 
roots, his vocabulary had comprised five words, two of 
which he was unable to pronounce properly. 

“Oh yeah, he’s really come on,” said Hagrid proudly. 
“Yeh’ll be amazed. I’m thinkin’ o’ trainin’ him up as 
me assistant.” 

Page | 189 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Ron snorted loudly, but managed to pass it off as a 
violent sneeze. They were now standing beside the 
oak front doors. 

“Anyway, I’ll see yeh tomorrow, firs’ lesson’s straight 
after lunch. Come early an’ yeh can say hello ter Buck 
— I mean, Witherwings!” 

Raising an arm in cheery farewell, he headed out of 
the front doors into the darkness. 

Harry and Ron looked at each other. Harry could tell 
that Ron was experiencing the same sinking feeling as 
himself. 

“You’re not taking Care of Magical Creatures, are 
you?” 

Ron shook his head. “And you’re not either, are you?” 

Harry shook his head too. 

“And Hermione,” said Ron, “she’s not, is she?” 

Harry shook his head again. Exactly what Hagrid 
would say when he realized his three favorite 
students had given up his subject, he did not like to 
think. 



Page | 190 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




9 




THE HALF-BLOOD PRINCE 

Harry and Ron met Hermione in the common room 
before breakfast next morning. Hoping for some 
support for his theory, Harry lost no time in telling 
Hermione what he had overheard Malfoy saying on 
the Hogwarts Express. 

“But he was obviously showing off for Parkinson, 
wasn’t he?” interjected Ron quickly, before Hermione 
could say anything. 

“Well,” she said uncertainly, “I don’t know. ... It would 
be like Malfoy to make himself seem more important 
than he is ... but that’s a big lie to tell. ...” 

“Exactly,” said Harry, but he could not press the 
point, because so many people were trying to listen in 
to his conversation, not to mention staring at him and 
whispering behind their hands. 

“It’s rude to point,” Ron snapped at a particularly 
minuscule first-year boy as they joined the queue to 
climb out of the portrait hole. The boy, who had been 

Page | 191 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



muttering something about Harry behind his hand to 
his friend, promptly turned scarlet and toppled out of 
the hole in alarm. Ron sniggered. 

“I love being a sixth year. And we’re going to be 
getting free time this year. Whole periods when we 
can just sit up here and relax.” 

“We’re going to need that time for studying, Ron!” said 
Hermione, as they set off down the corridor. 

“Yeah, but not today,” said Ron. “Today’s going to be 
a real doss, I reckon.” 

“Hold it!” said Hermione, throwing out an arm and 
halting a passing fourth year, who was attempting to 
push past her with a lime-green disk clutched tightly 
in his hand. “Fanged Frisbees are banned, hand it 
over,” she told him sternly. The scowling boy handed 
over the snarling Frisbee, ducked under her arm, and 
took off after his friends. Ron waited for him to 
vanish, then tugged the Frisbee from Hermione ’s grip. 

“Excellent, I’ve always wanted one of these.” 

Hermione ’s remonstration was drowned by a loud 
giggle; Lavender Brown had apparently found Ron’s 
remark highly amusing. She continued to laugh as 
she passed them, glancing back at Ron over her 
shoulder. Ron looked rather pleased with himself. 

The ceiling of the Great Hall was serenely blue and 
streaked with frail, wispy clouds, just like the squares 
of sky visible through the high mullioned windows. 
While they tucked into porridge and eggs and bacon, 
Harry and Ron told Hermione about their 
embarrassing conversation with Hagrid the previous 
evening. 



Page | 192 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“But he can’t really think we’d continue Care of 
Magical Creatures!” she said, looking distressed. “I 
mean, when has any of us expressed ... you know ... 
any enthusiasm?” 

“That’s it, though, innit?” said Ron, swallowing an 
entire fried egg whole. “We were the ones who made 
the most effort in classes because we like Hagrid. But 
he thinks we liked the stupid subject D’you reckon 
anyone’s going to go on to N.E.W.T.?” 

Neither Harry nor Hermione answered; there was no 
need. They knew perfectly well that nobody in their 
year would want to continue Care of Magical 
Creatures. They avoided Hagrid’s eye and returned 
his cheery wave only halfheartedly when he left the 
staff table ten minutes later. 

After they had eaten, they remained in their places, 
awaiting Professor McGonagall’s descent from the 
staff table. The distribution of class schedules was 
more complicated than usual this year, for Professor 
McGonagall needed first to confirm that everybody 
had achieved the necessary O.W.L. grades to continue 
with their chosen N.E.W.T.s. 

Hermione was immediately cleared to continue with 
Charms, Defense Against the Dark Arts, 
Transfiguration, Herbology, Arithmancy, Ancient 
Runes, and Potions, and shot off to a first-period 
Ancient Runes class without further ado. Neville took 
a little longer to sort out; his round face was anxious 
as Professor McGonagall looked down his application 
and then consulted his O.W.L. results. 

“Herbology, fine,” she said. “Professor Sprout will be 
delighted to see you back with an ‘Outstanding’ 

O.W.L. And you qualify for Defense Against the Dark 
Arts with ‘Exceeds Expectations.’ But the problem is 

Page | 193 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Transfiguration. I’m sorry, Longbottom, but an 
Acceptable’ really isn’t good enough to continue to 
N.E.W.T level. I just don’t think you’d be able to cope 
with the coursework.” 

Neville hung his head. Professor McGonagall peered 
at him through her square spectacles. 

“Why do you want to continue with Transfiguration, 
anyway? I’ve never had the impression that you 
particularly enjoyed it.” 

Neville looked miserable and muttered something 
about “my grandmother wants.” 

“Hmph,” snorted Professor McGonagall. “It’s high time 
your grandmother learned to be proud of the 
grandson she’s got, rather than the one she thinks 
she ought to have — particularly after what happened 
at the Ministry.” 

Neville turned very pink and blinked confusedly; 
Professor McGonagall had never paid him a 
compliment before. 

“I’m sorry, Longbottom, but I cannot let you into my 
N.E.W.T. class. I see that you have an ‘Exceeds 
Expectations’ in Charms, however — why not try for a 
N.E.W.T. in Charms?” 

“My grandmother thinks Charms is a soft option,” 
mumbled Neville. 

“Take Charms,” said Professor McGonagall, “and I 
shall drop Augusta a line reminding her that just 
because she failed her Charms O.W.L., the subject is 
not necessarily worthless.” Smiling slightly at the look 
of delighted incredulity on Neville’s face, Professor 
McGonagall tapped a blank schedule with the tip of 
Page | 194 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




her wand and handed it, now carrying details of his 
new classes, to Neville. 

Professor McGonagall turned next to Parvati Patil, 
whose first question was whether Firenze, the 
handsome centaur, was still teaching Divination. 

“He and Professor Trelawney are dividing classes 
between them this year,” said Professor McGonagall, 
a hint of disapproval in her voice; it was common 
knowledge that she despised the subject of 
Divination. “The sixth year is being taken by Professor 
Trelawney.” 

Parvati set off for Divination five minutes later looking 
slightly crestfallen. 

“So, Potter, Potter ...” said Professor McGonagall, 
consulting her notes as she turned to Harry. 

“Charms, Defense Against the Dark Arts, Herbology, 
Transfiguration ... all fine. I must say, I was pleased 
with your Transfiguration mark, Potter, very pleased. 
Now, why haven’t you applied to continue with 
Potions? I thought it was your ambition to become an 
Auror?” 

“It was, but you told me I had to get an ‘Outstanding’ 
in my O.W.L., Professor.” 

“And so you did when Professor Snape was teaching 
the subject. Professor Slughorn, however, is perfectly 
happy to accept N.E.W.T students with ‘Exceeds 
Expectations’ at O.W.L. Do you wish to proceed with 
Potions?” 

“Yes,” said Harry, “but I didn’t buy the books or any 
ingredients or anything — ” 



Page | 195 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I’m sure Professor Slughorn will be able to lend you 
some,” said Professor McGonagall. “Very well, Potter, 
here is your schedule. Oh, by the way — twenty 
hopefuls have already put down their names for the 
Gryffindor Quidditch team. I shall pass the list to you 
in due course and you can fix up trials at your 
leisure.” 

A few minutes later, Ron was cleared to do the same 
subjects as Harry, and the two of them left the table 
together. 

“Look,” said Ron delightedly, gazing at his schedule, 
“we’ve got a free period now ... and a free period after 
break ... and after lunch ... excellent.” 

They returned to the common room, which was empty 
apart from a half dozen seventh years, including Katie 
Bell, the only remaining member of the original 
Gryffindor Quidditch team that Harry had joined in 
his first year. 

“I thought you’d get that, well done,” she called over, 
pointing at the Captain’s badge on Harry’s chest. “Tell 
me when you call trials!” 

“Don’t be stupid,” said Harry, “you don’t need to try 
out, I’ve watched you play for five years. ...” 

“You mustn’t start off like that,” she said warningly. 
“For all you know, there’s someone much better than 
me out there. Good teams have been ruined before 
now because Captains just kept playing the old faces, 
or letting in their friends. ...” 

Ron looked a little uncomfortable and began playing 
with the Fanged Frisbee Hermione had taken from the 
fourth-year student. It zoomed around the common 
room, snarling and attempting to take bites of the 

Page | 196 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




tapestry. Crookshanks’s yellow eyes followed it and he 
hissed when it came too close. 

An hour later they reluctantly left the sunlit common 
room for the Defense Against the Dark Arts classroom 
four floors below. Hermione was already queuing 
outside, carrying an armful of heavy books and 
looking put-upon. 

“We got so much homework for Runes,” she said 
anxiously, when Harry and Ron joined her. “A fifteen- 
inch essay, two translations, and I’ve got to read 
these by Wednesday!” 

“Shame,” yawned Ron. 

“You wait,” she said resentfully. “I bet Snape gives us 
loads.” 

The classroom door opened as she spoke, and Snape 
stepped into the corridor, his sallow face framed as 
ever by two curtains of greasy black hair. Silence fell 
over the queue immediately. 

“Inside,” he said. 

Harry looked around as they entered. Snape had 
imposed his personality upon the room already; it 
was gloomier than usual, as curtains had been drawn 
over the windows, and was lit by candlelight. New 
pictures adorned the walls, many of them showing 
people who appeared to be in pain, sporting grisly 
injuries or strangely contorted body parts. Nobody 
spoke as they settled down, looking around at the 
shadowy, gruesome pictures. 

“I have not asked you to take out your books,” said 
Snape, closing the door and moving to face the class 
from behind his desk; Hermione hastily dropped her 

Page | 197 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




copy of Confronting the Faceless back into her bag 
and stowed it under her chair. “I wish to speak to 
you, and I want your fullest attention.” 

His black eyes roved over their upturned faces, 
lingering for a fraction of a second longer on Harry’s 
than anyone else’s. 

“You have had five teachers in this subject so far, I 
believe.” 

You believe ... like you haven’t watched them all come 
and go, Snape, hoping you’d be next, thought Harry 
scathingly. 

“Naturally, these teachers will all have had their own 
methods and priorities. Given this confusion I am 
surprised so many of you scraped an O.W.L. in this 
subject. I shall be even more surprised if all of you 
manage to keep up with the N.E.W.T. work, which will 
be much more advanced.” 

Snape set off around the edge of the room, speaking 
now in a lower voice; the class craned their necks to 
keep him in view. 

“The Dark Arts,” said Snape, “are many, varied, ever- 
changing, and eternal. Fighting them is like fighting a 
many-headed monster, which, each time a neck is 
severed, sprouts a head even fiercer and cleverer than 
before. You are fighting that which is unfixed, 
mutating, indestructible.” 

Harry stared at Snape. It was surely one thing to 
respect the Dark Arts as a dangerous enemy, another 
to speak of them, as Snape was doing, with a loving 
caress in his voice? 



Page | 198 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Your defenses,” said Snape, a little louder, “must 
therefore be as flexible and inventive as the arts you 
seek to undo. These pictures” — he indicated a few of 
them as he swept past — “give a fair representation of 
what happens to those who suffer, for instance, the 
Cruciatus Curse” — he waved a hand toward a witch 
who was clearly shrieking in agony — “feel the 
Dementor’s Kiss” — a wizard lying huddled and 
blank-eyed, slumped against a wall — “or provoke the 
aggression of the Inferius” — a bloody mass upon the 
ground. 

“Has an Inferius been seen, then?” said Parvati Patil 
in a high-pitched voice. “Is it definite, is he using 
them?” 

“The Dark Lord has used Inferi in the past,” said 
Snape, “which means you would be well-advised to 
assume he might use them again. Now ...” 

He set off again around the other side of the 
classroom toward his desk, and again, they watched 
him as he walked, his dark robes billowing behind 
him. 

"... you are, I believe, complete novices in the use of 
nonverbal spells. What is the advantage of a 
nonverbal spell?” 

Hermione’s hand shot into the air. Snape took his 
time looking around at everybody else, making sure 
he had no choice, before saying curtly, “Very well — 
Miss Granger?” 

“Your adversary has no warning about what kind of 
magic you’re about to perform,” said Hermione, 

“which gives you a split-second advantage.” 



Page | 199 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“An answer copied almost word for word from The 
Standard Book of Spells, Grade Six,” said Snape 
dismissively (over in the corner, Malfoy sniggered), 
“but correct in essentials. Yes, those who progress to 
using magic without shouting incantations gain an 
element of surprise in their spell-casting. Not all 
wizards can do this, of course; it is a question of 
concentration and mind power which some” — his 
gaze lingered maliciously upon Harry once more — 
“lack.” 

Harry knew Snape was thinking of their disastrous 
Occlumency lessons of the previous year. He refused 
to drop his gaze, but glowered at Snape until Snape 
looked away. 

“You will now divide,” Snape went on, “into pairs. One 
partner will attempt to jinx the other without 
speaking. The other will attempt to repel the jinx in 
equal silence. Carry on.” 

Although Snape did not know it, Harry had taught at 
least half the class (everyone who had been a member 
of the D.A.) how to perform a Shield Charm the 
previous year. None of them had ever cast the charm 
without speaking, however. A reasonable amount of 
cheating ensued; many people were merely 
whispering the incantation instead of saying it aloud. 
Typically, ten minutes into the lesson Hermione 
managed to repel Neville’s muttered Jelly-Legs Jinx 
without uttering a single word, a feat that would 
surely have earned her twenty points for Gryffindor 
from any reasonable teacher, thought Harry bitterly, 
but which Snape ignored. He swept between them as 
they practiced, looking just as much like an 
overgrown bat as ever, lingering to watch Harry and 
Ron struggling with the task. 



Page | 200 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Ron, who was supposed to be jinxing Harry, was 
purple in the face, his lips tightly compressed to save 
himself from the temptation of muttering the 
incantation. Harry had his wand raised, waiting on 
tenterhooks to repel a jinx that seemed unlikely ever 
to come. 

“Pathetic, Weasley,” said Snape, after a while. “Here 
— let me show you — ” 

He turned his wand on Harry so fast that Harry 
reacted instinctively; all thought of nonverbal spells 
forgotten, he yelled, “Protegol” 

His Shield Charm was so strong Snape was knocked 
off-balance and hit a desk. The whole class had 
looked around and now watched as Snape righted 
himself, scowling. 

“Do you remember me telling you we are practicing 
nonverbal spells, Potter?” 

“Yes,” said Harry stiffly. 

“Yes, sir.” 

“There’s no need to call me ‘sir,’ Professor.” 

The words had escaped him before he knew what he 
was saying. Several people gasped, including 
Hermione. Behind Snape, however, Ron, Dean, and 
Seamus grinned appreciatively. 

“Detention, Saturday night, my office,” said Snape. “I 
do not take cheek from anyone, Potter ... not even ‘the 
Chosen One. ’ ” 

“That was brilliant, Harry!” chortled Ron, once they 
were safely on their way to break a short while later. 

Page | 201 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




“You really shouldn’t have said it,” said Hermione, 
frowning at Ron. “What made you?” 



“He tried to jinx me, in case you didn’t notice!” fumed 
Harry. “I had enough of that during those 
Occlumency lessons! Why doesn’t he use another 
guinea pig for a change? What’s Dumbledore playing 
at, anyway, letting him teach Defense? Did you hear 
him talking about the Dark Arts? He loves them! All 
that unfixed, indestructible stuff — ” 

“Well,” said Hermione, “I thought he sounded a bit 
like you.” 

“Like me?” 

“Yes, when you were telling us what it’s like to face 
Voldemort. You said it wasn’t just memorizing a 
bunch of spells, you said it was just you and your 
brains and your guts — well, wasn’t that what Snape 
was saying? That it really comes down to being brave 
and quick-thinking?” 

Harry was so disarmed that she had thought his 
words as well worth memorizing as The Standard 
Book of Spells that he did not argue. 

“Harry! Hey, Harry!” 

Harry looked around; Jack Sloper, one of the Beaters 
on last year’s Gryffindor Quidditch team, was 
hurrying toward him holding a roll of parchment. 

“For you,” panted Sloper. “Listen, I heard you’re the 
new Captain. When’re you holding trials?” 

“I’m not sure yet,” said Harry, thinking privately that 
Sloper would be very lucky to get back on the team. 
“I’ll let you know.” 

Page | 202 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh, right. I was hoping it’d be this weekend — ” 



But Harry was not listening; he had just recognized 
the thin, slanting writing on the parchment. Leaving 
Sloper in mid-sentence, he hurried away with Ron 
and Hermione, unrolling the parchment as he went. 

Dear Harry, 

I would like to start our private lessons this Saturday. 
Kindly come along to my office at 8 p.m. I hope you are 
enjoying your first day back at school. 

Yours sincerely, 

Albus Dumbledore 

P. S. I enjoy Acid Pops. 

“He enjoys Acid Pops?” said Ron, who had read the 
message over Harry’s shoulder and was looking 
perplexed. 

“It’s the password to get past the gargoyle outside his 
study,” said Harry in a low voice. “Ha! Snape’s not 
going to be pleased. ... I won’t be able to do his 
detention!” 

He, Ron, and Hermione spent the whole of break 
speculating on what Dumbledore would teach Harry. 
Ron thought it most likely to be spectacular jinxes 
and hexes of the type the Death Eaters would not 
know. Hermione said such things were illegal, and 
thought it much more likely that Dumbledore wanted 
to teach Harry advanced Defensive magic. After 
break, she went off to Arithmancy while Harry and 
Ron returned to the common room, where they 
grudgingly started Snape’s homework. This turned 
out to be so complex that they still had not finished 
Page | 203 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




when Hermione joined them for their after-lunch free 
period (though she considerably speeded up the 
process). They had only just finished when the bell 
rang for the afternoon’s double Potions and they beat 
the familiar path down to the dungeon classroom that 
had, for so long, been Snape’s. 

When they arrived in the corridor they saw that there 
were only a dozen people progressing to N.E.W.T. 
level. Crabbe and Goyle had evidently failed to achieve 
the required O.W.L. grade, but four Slytherins had 
made it through, including Malfoy. Four Ravenclaws 
were there, and one Hufflepuff, Ernie Macmillan, 
whom Harry liked despite his rather pompous 
manner. 

“Harry,” Ernie said portentously, holding out his hand 
as Harry approached, “didn’t get a chance to speak in 
Defense Against the Dark Arts this morning. Good 
lesson, I thought, but Shield Charms are old hat, of 
course, for us old D.A. lags ... And how are you, Ron 
— Hermione?” 

Before they could say more than “fine,” the dungeon 
door opened and Slughorn’s belly preceded him out of 
the door. As they filed into the room, his great walrus 
mustache curved above his beaming mouth, and he 
greeted Harry and Zabini with particular enthusiasm. 

The dungeon was, most unusually, already full of 
vapors and odd smells. Harry, Ron, and Hermione 
sniffed interestedly as they passed large, bubbling 
cauldrons. The four Slytherins took a table together, 
as did the four Ravenclaws. This left Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione to share a table with Ernie. They chose the 
one nearest a gold-colored cauldron that was emitting 
one of the most seductive scents Harry had ever 
inhaled: Somehow it reminded him simultaneously of 
treacle tart, the woody smell of a broomstick handle, 
Page | 204 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




and something flowery he thought he might have 
smelled at the Burrow. He found that he was 
breathing very slowly and deeply and that the potion’s 
fumes seemed to be filling him up like drink. A great 
contentment stole over him; he grinned across at Ron, 
who grinned back lazily. 

“Now then, now then, now then,” said Slughorn, 
whose massive outline was quivering through the 
many shimmering vapors. “Scales out, everyone, and 
potion kits, and don’t forget your copies of Advanced 
Potion-Making. ...” 

“Sir?” said Harry, raising his hand. 

“Harry, m’boy?” 

“I haven’t got a book or scales or anything — nor’s 
Ron — we didn’t realize we’d be able to do the 
N.E.W.T., you see — ” 

“Ah, yes, Professor McGonagall did mention ... not to 
worry, my dear boy, not to worry at all. You can use 
ingredients from the store cupboard today, and I’m 
sure we can lend you some scales, and we’ve got a 
small stock of old books here, they’ll do until you can 
write to Flourish and Blotts. ...” 

Slughorn strode over to a corner cupboard and, after 
a moment’s foraging, emerged with two very battered- 
looking copies of Advanced Potion-Making by Libatius 
Borage, which he gave to Harry and Ron along with 
two sets of tarnished scales. 

“Now then,” said Slughorn, returning to the front of 
the class and inflating his already bulging chest so 
that the buttons on his waistcoat threatened to burst 
off, “I’ve prepared a few potions for you to have a look 
at, just out of interest, you know. These are the kind 
Page | 205 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




of thing you ought to be able to make after completing 
your N.E.W.T.s. You ought to have heard of ’em, even 
if you haven’t made ’em yet. Anyone tell me what this 
one is?” 

He indicated the cauldron nearest the Slytherin table. 
Harry raised himself slightly in his seat and saw what 
looked like plain water boiling away inside it. 

Hermione’s well-practiced hand hit the air before 
anybody else’s; Slughorn pointed at her. 

“It’s Veritaserum, a colorless, odorless potion that 
forces the drinker to tell the truth,” said Hermione. 

“Very good, very good!” said Slughorn happily. “Now,” 
he continued, pointing at the cauldron nearest the 
Ravenclaw table, “this one here is pretty well known. 
... Featured in a few Ministry leaflets lately too ... Who 
can — ?” 

Hermione’s hand was fastest once more. 

“It’s Polyjuice Potion, sir,” she said. 

Harry too had recognized the slow-bubbling, mudlike 
substance in the second cauldron, but did not resent 
Hermione getting the credit for answering the 
question; she, after all, was the one who had 
succeeded in making it, back in their second year. 

“Excellent, excellent! Now, this one here ... yes, my 
dear?” said Slughorn, now looking slightly bemused, 
as Hermione’s hand punched the air again. 

“It’s Amortentia!” 



Page | 206 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“It is indeed. It seems almost foolish to ask,” said 
Slughorn, who was looking mightily impressed, “but I 
assume you know what it does?” 

“It’s the most powerful love potion in the world!” said 
Hermione. 

“Quite right! You recognized it, I suppose, by its 
distinctive mother-of-pearl sheen?” 

“And the steam rising in characteristic spirals,” said 
Hermione enthusiastically, “and it’s supposed to 
smell differently to each of us, according to what 
attracts us, and I can smell freshly mown grass and 
new parchment and — ” 

But she turned slightly pink and did not complete the 
sentence. 

“May I ask your name, my dear?” said Slughorn, 
ignoring Hermione’s embarrassment. 

“Hermione Granger, sir.” 

“Granger? Granger? Can you possibly be related to 
Hector Dagworth-Granger, who founded the Most 
Extraordinary Society of Potioneers?” 

“No, I don’t think so, sir. I’m Muggle-born, you see.” 

Harry saw Malfoy lean close to Nott and whisper 
something; both of them sniggered, but Slughorn 
showed no dismay; on the contrary, he beamed and 
looked from Hermione to Harry, who was sitting next 
to her. 

“Oho! ‘One of my best friends is Muggle-born, and 
she’s the best in our yeah’ I’m assuming this is the 
very friend of whom you spoke, Harry?” 

Page | 207 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes, sir,” said Harry. 



“Well, well, take twenty well-earned points for 
Gryffindor, Miss Granger,” said Slughorn genially. 

Malfoy looked rather as he had done the time 
Hermione had punched him in the face. Hermione 
turned to Harry with a radiant expression and 
whispered, “Did you really tell him I’m the best in the 
year? Oh, Harry!” 

“Well, what’s so impressive about that?” whispered 
Ron, who for some reason looked annoyed. “You are 
the best in the year — I’d’ve told him so if he’d asked 
me!” 

Hermione smiled but made a “shhing” gesture, so that 
they could hear what Slughorn was saying. Ron 
looked slightly disgruntled. 

“Amortentia doesn’t really create love, of course. It is 
impossible to manufacture or imitate love. No, this 
will simply cause a powerful infatuation or obsession. 
It is probably the most dangerous and powerful 
potion in this room — oh yes,” he said, nodding 
gravely at Malfoy and Nott, both of whom were 
smirking skeptically. “When you have seen as much 
of life as I have, you will not underestimate the power 
of obsessive love. ... 

“And now,” said Slughorn, “it is time for us to start 
work.” 

“Sir, you haven’t told us what’s in this one,” said 
Ernie Macmillan, pointing at a small black cauldron 
standing on Slughorn ’s desk. The potion within was 
splashing about merrily; it was the color of molten 
gold, and large drops were leaping like goldfish above 
the surface, though not a particle had spilled. 

Page | 208 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Oho,” said Slughorn again. Harry was sure that 
Slughorn had not forgotten the potion at all, but had 
waited to be asked for dramatic effect. “Yes. That. 
Well, that one, ladies and gentlemen, is a most 
curious little potion called Felix Felicis. I take it,” he 
turned, smiling, to look at Hermione, who had let out 
an audible gasp, “that you know what Felix Felicis 
does, Miss Granger?” 

“It’s liquid luck,” said Hermione excitedly. “It makes 
you lucky!” 

The whole class seemed to sit up a little straighter. 
Now all Harry could see of Malfoy was the back of his 
sleek blond head, because he was at last giving 
Slughorn his full and undivided attention. 

“Quite right, take another ten points for Gryffindor. 
Yes, it’s a funny little potion, Felix Felicis,” said 
Slughorn. “Desperately tricky to make, and 
disastrous to get wrong. However, if brewed correctly, 
as this has been, you will find that all your endeavors 
tend to succeed ... at least until the effects wear off.” 

“Why don’t people drink it all the time, sir?” said 
Terry Boot eagerly. 

“Because if taken in excess, it causes giddiness, 
recklessness, and dangerous overconfidence,” said 
Slughorn. “Too much of a good thing, you know ... 
highly toxic in large quantities. But taken sparingly, 
and very occasionally ...” 

“Have you ever taken it, sir?” asked Michael Corner 
with great interest. 

“Twice in my life,” said Slughorn. “Once when I was 
twenty-four, once when I was fifty-seven. Two 



Page | 209 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




tablespoonfuls taken with breakfast. Two perfect 
days.” 

He gazed dreamily into the distance. Whether he was 
playacting or not, thought Harry, the effect was good. 

“And that,” said Slughorn, apparently coming back to 
earth, “is what I shall be offering as a prize in this 
lesson.” 

There was silence in which every bubble and gurgle of 
the surrounding potions seemed magnified tenfold. 

“One tiny bottle of Felix Felicis,” said Slughorn, taking 
a minuscule glass bottle with a cork in it out of his 
pocket and showing it to them all. “Enough for twelve 
hours’ luck. From dawn till dusk, you will be lucky in 
everything you attempt. 

“Now, I must give you warning that Felix Felicis is a 
banned substance in organized competitions . . . 
sporting events, for instance, examinations, or 
elections. So the winner is to use it on an ordinary 
day only . . . and watch how that ordinary day becomes 
extraordinary! 

“So,” said Slughorn, suddenly brisk, “how are you to 
win my fabulous prize? Well, by turning to page ten of 
Advanced Potion-Making. We have a little over an hour 
left to us, which should be time for you to make a 
decent attempt at the Draught of Living Death. I know 
it is more complex than anything you have attempted 
before, and I do not expect a perfect potion from 
anybody. The person who does best, however, will win 
little Felix here. Off you go!” 

There was a scraping as everyone drew their 
cauldrons toward them and some loud clunks as 
people began adding weights to their scales, but 

Page | 210 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




nobody spoke. The concentration within the room was 
almost tangible. Harry saw Malfoy riffling feverishly 
through his copy of Advanced Potion-Making. It could 
not have been clearer that Malfoy really wanted that 
lucky day. Harry bent swiftly over the tattered book 
Slughorn had lent him. 

To his annoyance he saw that the previous owner had 
scribbled all over the pages, so that the margins were 
as black as the printed portions. Bending low to 
decipher the ingredients (even here, the previous 
owner had made annotations and crossed things out) 
Harry hurried off toward the store cupboard to find 
what he needed. As he dashed back to his cauldron, 
he saw Malfoy cutting up valerian roots as fast as he 
could. 

Everyone kept glancing around at what the rest of the 
class was doing; this was both an advantage and a 
disadvantage of Potions, that it was hard to keep your 
work private. Within ten minutes, the whole place 
was full of bluish steam. Hermione, of course, seemed 
to have progressed furthest. Her potion already 
resembled the “smooth, black currant-colored liquid” 
mentioned as the ideal halfway stage. 

Having finished chopping his roots, Harry bent low 
over his book again. It was really very irritating, 
having to try and decipher the directions under all the 
stupid scribbles of the previous owner, who for some 
reason had taken issue with the order to cut up the 
sopophorous bean and had written in the alternative 
instruction: 

Crush with flat side of silver dagger, 
releases juice better than cutting. 



Page | 211 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Sir, I think you knew my grandfather, Abraxas 
Malfoy?” 

Harry looked up; Slughorn was just passing the 
Slytherin table. 

“Yes,” said Slughorn, without looking at Malfoy, “I 
was sorry to hear he had died, although of course it 
wasn’t unexpected, dragon pox at his age. ...” 

And he walked away. Harry bent back over his 
cauldron, smirking. He could tell that Malfoy had 
expected to be treated like Harry or Zabini; perhaps 
even hoped for some preferential treatment of the type 
he had learned to expect from Snape. It looked as 
though Malfoy would have to rely on nothing but 
talent to win the bottle of Felix Felicis. 

The sopophorous bean was proving very difficult to 
cut up. Harry turned to Hermione. 

“Can I borrow your silver knife?” 

She nodded impatiently, not taking her eyes off her 
potion, which was still deep purple, though according 
to the book ought to be turning a light shade of lilac 
by now. 

Harry crushed his bean with the flat side of the 
dagger. To his astonishment, it immediately exuded 
so much juice he was amazed the shriveled bean 
could have held it all. Hastily scooping it all into the 
cauldron he saw, to his surprise, that the potion 
immediately turned exactly the shade of lilac 
described by the textbook. 

His annoyance with the previous owner vanishing on 
the spot, Harry now squinted at the next line of 
instructions. According to the book, he had to stir 

Page | 212 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




counterclockwise until the potion turned clear as 
water. According to the addition the previous owner 
had made, however, he ought to add a clockwise stir 
after every seventh counterclockwise stir. Could the 
old owner be right twice? 

Harry stirred counterclockwise, held his breath, and 
stirred once clockwise. The effect was immediate. The 
potion turned palest pink. 

“How are you doing that?” demanded Hermione, who 
was red-faced and whose hair was growing bushier 
and bushier in the fumes from her cauldron; her 
potion was still resolutely purple. 

“Add a clockwise stir — ” 

“No, no, the book says counterclockwise!” she 
snapped. 

Harry shrugged and continued what he was doing. 
Seven stirs counterclockwise, one clockwise, pause ... 
seven stirs counterclockwise, one stir clockwise ... 

Across the table, Ron was cursing fluently under his 
breath; his potion looked like liquid licorice. Harry 
glanced around. As far as he could see, no one else’s 
potion had turned as pale as his. He felt elated, 
something that had certainly never happened before 
in this dungeon. 

“And time’s ... up!” called Slughorn. “Stop stirring, 
please!” 

Slughorn moved slowly among the tables, peering into 
cauldrons. He made no comment, but occasionally 
gave the potions a stir or a sniff. At last he reached 
the table where Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Ernie 
were sitting. He smiled ruefully at the tarlike 
Page | 213 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




substance in Ron’s cauldron. He passed over Ernie’s 
navy concoction. Hermione’s potion he gave an 
approving nod. Then he saw Harry’s, and a look of 
incredulous delight spread over his face. 

“The clear winner!” he cried to the dungeon. 

“Excellent, excellent, Harry! Good lord, it’s clear 
you’ve inherited your mother’s talent. She was a dab 
hand at Potions, Lily was! Here you are, then, here 
you are — one bottle of Felix Felicis, as promised, and 
use it well!” 

Harry slipped the tiny bottle of golden liquid into his 
inner pocket, feeling an odd combination of delight at 
the furious looks on the Slytherins’ faces and guilt at 
the disappointed expression on Hermione’s. Ron 
looked simply dumbfounded. 

“How did you do that?” he whispered to Harry as they 
left the dungeon. 

“Got lucky, I suppose,” said Harry, because Malfoy 
was within earshot. 

Once they were securely ensconced at the Gryffindor 
table for dinner, however, he felt safe enough to tell 
them. Hermione’s face became stonier with every 
word he uttered. 

“I s’pose you think I cheated?” he finished, aggravated 
by her expression. 

“Well, it wasn’t exactly your own work, was it?” she 
said stiffly. 

“He only followed different instructions to ours,” said 
Ron. “Could’ve been a catastrophe, couldn’t it? But he 
took a risk and it paid off.” He heaved a sigh. 
“Slughorn could’ve handed me that book, but no, I get 

Page | 214 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




the one no one’s ever written on. Puked on, by the 
look of page fifty-two, but — ” 

“Hang on,” said a voice close by Harry’s left ear and 
he caught a sudden waft of that flowery smell he had 
picked up in Slughorn’s dungeon. He looked around 
and saw that Ginny had joined them. “Did I hear 
right? You’ve been taking orders from something 
someone wrote in a book, Harry?” 

She looked alarmed and angry. Harry knew what was 
on her mind at once. 

“It’s nothing,” he said reassuringly, lowering his voice. 
“It’s not like, you know, Riddle’s diary. It’s just an old 
textbook someone’s scribbled on.” 

“But you’re doing what it says?” 

“I just tried a few of the tips written in the margins, 
honestly, Ginny, there’s nothing funny — ” 

“Ginny’s got a point,” said Hermione, perking up at 
once. “We ought to check that there’s nothing odd 
about it. I mean, all these funny instructions, who 
knows?” 

“Hey!” said Harry indignantly, as she pulled his copy 
of Advanced Potion-Making out of his bag and raised 
her wand. 

“ Specialis Revelio\” she said, rapping it smartly on the 
front cover. 

Nothing whatsoever happened. The book simply lay 
there, looking old and dirty and dog-eared. 

“Finished?” said Harry irritably. “Or d’you want to 
wait and see if it does a few backflips?” 

Page | 215 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“It seems all right,” said Hermione, still staring at the 
book suspiciously. “I mean, it really does seem to be 
... just a textbook.” 

“Good. Then I’ll have it back,” said Harry, snatching it 
off the table, but it slipped from his hand and landed 
open on the floor. 

Nobody else was looking. Harry bent low to retrieve 
the book, and as he did so, he saw something 
scribbled along the bottom of the back cover in the 
same small, cramped handwriting as the instructions 
that had won him his bottle of Felix Felicis, now 
safely hidden inside a pair of socks in his trunk 
upstairs. 

This Book is the Property of the Half-Blood Prince. 



Page | 216 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




10 




THE HOUSE OF GAUNT 

For the rest of the week’s Potions lessons Harry 
continued to follow the Half-Blood Prince’s 
instructions wherever they deviated from Libatius 
Borage’s, with the result that by their fourth lesson 
Slughorn was raving about Harry’s abilities, saying 
that he had rarely taught anyone so talented. Neither 
Ron nor Hermione was delighted by this. Although 
Harry had offered to share his book with both of 
them, Ron had more difficulty deciphering the 
handwriting than Harry did, and could not keep 
asking Harry to read aloud or it might look 
suspicious. Hermione, meanwhile, was resolutely 
plowing on with what she called the “official” 
instructions, but becoming increasingly bad-tempered 
as they yielded poorer results than the Prince’s. 

Harry wondered vaguely who the Half-Blood Prince 
had been. Although the amount of homework they 
had been given prevented him from reading the whole 
of his copy of Advanced Potion-Making, he had 
skimmed through it sufficiently to see that there was 

Page | 217 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




barely a page on which the Prince had not made 
additional notes, not all of them concerned with 
potion-making. Here and there were directions for 
what looked like spells that the Prince had made up 
himself. 

“Or herself,” said Hermione irritably, overhearing 
Harry pointing some of these out to Ron in the 
common room on Saturday evening. “It might have 
been a girl. I think the handwriting looks more like a 
girl’s than a boy’s.” 

“The Half-Blood Prince, he was called,” Harry said. 
“How many girls have been Princes?” 

Hermione seemed to have no answer to this. She 
merely scowled and twitched her essay on The 
Principles of Re materialization away from Ron, who 
was trying to read it upside down. 

Harry looked at his watch and hurriedly put the old 
copy of Advanced Potion-Making back into his bag. 

“It’s five to eight, I’d better go, I’ll be late for 
Dumbledore.” 

“Ooooh!” gasped Hermione, looking up at once. “Good 
luck! We’ll wait up, we want to hear what he teaches 
you!” 

“Hope it goes okay,” said Ron, and the pair of them 
watched Harry leave through the portrait hole. 

Harry proceeded through deserted corridors, though 
he had to step hastily behind a statue when Professor 
Trelawney appeared around a corner, muttering to 
herself as she shuffled a pack of dirty-looking playing 
cards, reading them as she walked. 



Page | 218 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Two of spades: conflict,” she murmured, as she 
passed the place where Harry crouched, hidden. 
“Seven of spades: an ill omen. Ten of spades: violence. 
Knave of spades: a dark young man, possibly 
troubled, one who dislikes the questioner — ” 

She stopped dead, right on the other side of Harry’s 
statue. 

“Well, that can’t be right,” she said, annoyed, and 
Harry heard her reshuffling vigorously as she set off 
again, leaving nothing but a whiff of cooking sherry 
behind her. Harry waited until he was quite sure she 
had gone, then hurried off again until he reached the 
spot in the seventh-floor corridor where a single 
gargoyle stood against the wall. 

“Acid Pops,” said Harry, and the gargoyle leapt aside; 
the wall behind it slid apart, and a moving spiral 
stone staircase was revealed, onto which Harry 
stepped, so that he was carried in smooth circles up 
to the door with the brass knocker that led to 
Dumbledore’s office. 

Harry knocked. 

“Come in,” said Dumbledore’s voice. 

“Good evening, sir,” said Harry, walking into the 
headmaster’s office. 

“Ah, good evening, Harry. Sit down,” said 
Dumbledore, smiling. “I hope you’ve had an enjoyable 
first week back at school?” 

“Yes, thanks, sir,” said Harry. 

“You must have been busy, a detention under your 
belt already!” 

Page | 219 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Er,” began Harry awkwardly, but Dumbledore did 
not look too stern. 

“I have arranged with Professor Snape that you will 
do your detention next Saturday instead.” 

“Right,” said Harry, who had more pressing matters 
on his mind than S nape’s detention, and now looked 
around surreptitiously for some indication of what 
Dumbledore was planning to do with him this 
evening. The circular office looked just as it always 
did; the delicate silver instruments stood on spindle- 
legged tables, puffing smoke and whirring; portraits of 
previous headmasters and headmistresses dozed in 
their frames, and Dumbledore’s magnificent phoenix, 
Fawkes, stood on his perch behind the door, watching 
Harry with bright interest. It did not even look as 
though Dumbledore had cleared a space for dueling 
practice. 

“So, Harry,” said Dumbledore, in a businesslike voice. 
“You have been wondering, I am sure, what I have 
planned for you during these — for want of a better 
word — lessons?” 

“Yes, sir.” 

“Well, I have decided that it is time, now that you 
know what prompted Lord Voldemort to try and kill 
you fifteen years ago, for you to be given certain 
information.” 

There was a pause. 

“You said, at the end of last term, you were going to 
tell me everything,” said Harry. It was hard to keep a 
note of accusation from his voice. “Sir,” he added. 



Page | 220 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“And so I did,” said Dumbledore placidly. “I told you 
everything I know. From this point forth, we shall be 
leaving the firm foundation of fact and journeying 
together through the murky marshes of memory into 
thickets of wildest guesswork. From here on in, 

Harry, I may be as woefully wrong as Humphrey 
Belcher, who believed the time was ripe for a cheese 
cauldron.” 

“But you think you’re right?” said Harry. 

“Naturally I do, but as I have already proven to you, I 
make mistakes like the next man. In fact, being — 
forgive me — rather cleverer than most men, my 
mistakes tend to be correspondingly huger.” 

“Sir,” said Harry tentatively, “does what you’re going 
to tell me have anything to do with the prophecy? Will 
it help me . . . survive?” 

“It has a very great deal to do with the prophecy,” said 
Dumbledore, as casually as if Harry had asked him 
about the next day’s weather, “and I certainly hope 
that it will help you to survive.” 

Dumbledore got to his feet and walked around the 
desk, past Harry, who turned eagerly in his seat to 
watch Dumbledore bending over the cabinet beside 
the door. When Dumbledore straightened up, he was 
holding a familiar shallow stone basin etched with 
odd markings around its rim. He placed the Pensieve 
on the desk in front of Harry. 

“You look worried.” 

Harry had indeed been eyeing the Pensieve with some 
apprehension. His previous experiences with the odd 
device that stored and revealed thoughts and 
memories, though highly instructive, had also been 

Page | 221 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




uncomfortable. The last time he had disturbed its 
contents, he had seen much more than he would 
have wished. But Dumbledore was smiling. 

“This time, you enter the Pensieve with me ... and, 
even more unusually, with permission.” 

“Where are we going, sir?” 

“For a trip down Bob Ogden’s memory lane,” said 
Dumbledore, pulling from his pocket a crystal bottle 
containing a swirling silvery- white substance. 

“Who was Bob Ogden?” 

“He was employed by the Department of Magical Law 
Enforcement,” said Dumbledore. “He died some time 
ago, but not before I had tracked him down and 
persuaded him to confide these recollections to me. 

We are about to accompany him on a visit he made in 
the course of his duties. If you will stand, Harry ...” 

But Dumbledore was having difficulty pulling out the 
stopper of the crystal bottle: His injured hand seemed 
stiff and painful. 

“Shall — shall I, sir?” 

“No matter, Harry — ” 

Dumbledore pointed his wand at the bottle and the 
cork flew out. 

“Sir — how did you injure your hand?” Harry asked 
again, looking at the blackened fingers with a mixture 
of revulsion and pity. 

“Now is not the moment for that story, Harry. Not yet. 
We have an appointment with Bob Ogden.” 

Page | 222 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore tipped the silvery contents of the bottle 
into the Pensieve, where they swirled and shimmered, 
neither liquid nor gas. 

“After you,” said Dumbledore, gesturing toward the 
bowl. 

Harry bent forward, took a deep breath, and plunged 
his face into the silvery substance. He felt his feet 
leave the office floor; he was falling, falling through 
whirling darkness and then, quite suddenly, he was 
blinking in dazzling sunlight. Before his eyes had 
adjusted, Dumbledore landed beside him. 

They were standing in a country lane bordered by 
high, tangled hedgerows, beneath a summer sky as 
bright and blue as a forget-me-not. Some ten feet in 
front of them stood a short, plump man wearing 
enormously thick glasses that reduced his eyes to 
molelike specks. He was reading a wooden signpost 
that was sticking out of the brambles on the left-hand 
side of the road. Harry knew this must be Ogden; he 
was the only person in sight, and he was also wearing 
the strange assortment of clothes so often chosen by 
inexperienced wizards trying to look like Muggles: in 
this case, a frock coat and spats over a striped one- 
piece bathing costume. Before Harry had time to do 
more than register his bizarre appearance, however, 
Ogden had set off at a brisk walk down the lane. 

Dumbledore and Harry followed. As they passed the 
wooden sign, Harry looked up at its two arms. The 
one pointing back the way they had come read: 

GREAT HANGLETON, 5 MILES. The arm pointing 
after Ogden said LITTLE HANGLETON, 1 MILE. 

They walked a short way with nothing to see but the 
hedgerows, the wide blue sky overhead and the 
swishing, frock-coated figure ahead. Then the lane 

Page | 223 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




curved to the left and fell away, sloping steeply down 
a hillside, so that they had a sudden, unexpected 
view of a whole valley laid out in front of them. Harry 
could see a village, undoubtedly Little Hangleton, 
nestled between two steep hills, its church and 
graveyard clearly visible. Across the valley, set on the 
opposite hillside, was a handsome manor house 
surrounded by a wide expanse of velvety green lawn. 

Ogden had broken into a reluctant trot due to the 
steep downward slope. Dumbledore lengthened his 
stride, and Harry hurried to keep up. He thought 
Little Hangleton must be their final destination and 
wondered, as he had done on the night they had 
found Slughorn, why they had to approach it from 
such a distance. He soon discovered that he was 
mistaken in thinking that they were going to the 
village, however. The lane curved to the right and 
when they rounded the corner, it was to see the very 
edge of Ogden’s frock coat vanishing through a gap in 
the hedge. 

Dumbledore and Harry followed him onto a narrow 
dirt track bordered by higher and wilder hedgerows 
than those they had left behind. The path was 
crooked, rocky, and potholed, sloping downhill like 
the last one, and it seemed to be heading for a patch 
of dark trees a little below them. Sure enough, the 
track soon opened up at the copse, and Dumbledore 
and Harry came to a halt behind Ogden, who had 
stopped and drawn his wand. 

Despite the cloudless sky, the old trees ahead cast 
deep, dark, cool shadows, and it was a few seconds 
before Harry’s eyes discerned the building half-hidden 
amongst the tangle of trunks. It seemed to him a very 
strange location to choose for a house, or else an odd 
decision to leave the trees growing nearby, blocking 
all light and the view of the valley below. He wondered 
Page | 224 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




whether it was inhabited; its walls were mossy and so 
many tiles had fallen off the roof that the rafters were 
visible in places. Nettles grew all around it, their tips 
reaching the windows, which were tiny and thick with 
grime. Just as he had concluded that nobody could 
possibly live there, however, one of the windows was 
thrown open with a clatter, and a thin trickle of steam 
or smoke issued from it, as though somebody was 
cooking. 

Ogden moved forward quietly and, it seemed to Harry, 
rather cautiously. As the dark shadows of the trees 
slid over him, he stopped again, staring at the front 
door, to which somebody had nailed a dead snake. 

Then there was a rustle and a crack, and a man in 
rags dropped from the nearest tree, landing on his 
feet right in front of Ogden, who leapt backward so 
fast he stood on the tails of his frock coat and 
stumbled. 

“ You’re not welcome.” 

The man standing before them had thick hair so 
matted with dirt it could have been any color. Several 
of his teeth were missing. His eyes were small and 
dark and stared in opposite directions. He might have 
looked comical, but he did not; the effect was 
frightening, and Harry could not blame Ogden for 
backing away several more paces before he spoke. 

“Er — good morning. I’m from the Ministry of Magic 



“ You’re not welcome.” 

“Er — I’m sorry — I don’t understand you,” said 
Ogden nervously. 



Page | 225 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry thought Ogden was being extremely dim; the 
stranger was making himself very clear in Harry’s 
opinion, particularly as he was brandishing a wand in 
one hand and a short and rather bloody knife in the 
other. 

“You understand him, I’m sure, Harry?” said 
Dumbledore quietly. 

“Yes, of course,” said Harry, slightly nonplussed. 

“Why can’t Ogden — ?” 

But as his eyes found the dead snake on the door 
again, he suddenly understood. 

“He’s speaking Parseltongue?” 

“Very good,” said Dumbledore, nodding and smiling. 

The man in rags was now advancing on Ogden, knife 
in one hand, wand in the other. 

“Now, look — ” Ogden began, but too late: There was a 
bang, and Ogden was on the ground, clutching his 
nose, while a nasty yellowish goo squirted from 
between his fingers. 

“Morfin!” said a loud voice. 

An elderly man had come hurrying out of the cottage, 
banging the door behind him so that the dead snake 
swung pathetically. This man was shorter than the 
first, and oddly proportioned; his shoulders were very 
broad and his arms overlong, which, with his bright 
brown eyes, short scrubby hair, and wrinkled face, 
gave him the look of a powerful, aged monkey. He 
came to a halt beside the man with the knife, who 
was now cackling with laughter at the sight of Ogden 
on the ground. 

Page | 226 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Ministry, is it?” said the older man, looking down at 
Ogden. 

“Correct!” said Ogden angrily, dabbing his face. “And 
you, I take it, are Mr. Gaunt?” 

“S’right,” said Gaunt. “Got you in the face, did he?” 

“Yes, he did!” snapped Ogden. 

“Should’ve made your presence known, shouldn’t 
you?” said Gaunt aggressively. “This is private 
property. Can’t just walk in here and not expect my 
son to defend himself.” 

“Defend himself against what, man?” said Ogden, 
clambering back to his feet. 

“Busybodies. Intruders. Muggles and filth.” 

Ogden pointed his wand at his own nose, which was 
still issuing large amounts of what looked like yellow 
pus, and the flow stopped at once. Mr. Gaunt spoke 
out of the corner of his mouth to Morfin. 

“Get in the house. Don’t argue.” 

This time, ready for it, Harry recognized Parseltongue; 
even while he could understand what was being said, 
he distinguished the weird hissing noise that was all 
Ogden could hear. Morfin seemed to be on the point 
of disagreeing, but when his father cast him a 
threatening look he changed his mind, lumbering 
away to the cottage with an odd rolling gait and 
slamming the front door behind him, so that the 
snake swung sadly again. 



Page | 227 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s your son I’m here to see, Mr. Gaunt,” said Ogden, 
as he mopped the last of the pus from the front of his 
coat. “That was Morfin, wasn’t it?” 

“Ar, that was Morfin,” said the old man indifferently. 
“Are you pure-blood?” he asked, suddenly aggressive. 

“That’s neither here nor there,” said Ogden coldly, 
and Harry felt his respect for Ogden rise. Apparently 
Gaunt felt rather differently. He squinted into Ogden’s 
face and muttered, in what was clearly supposed to 
be an offensive tone, “Now I come to think about it, 

I’ve seen noses like yours down in the village.” 

“I don’t doubt it, if your son’s been let loose on them,” 
said Ogden. “Perhaps we could continue this 
discussion inside?” 

“Inside?” 

“Yes, Mr. Gaunt. I’ve already told you. I’m here about 
Morfin. We sent an owl — ” 

“I’ve no use for owls,” said Gaunt. “I don’t open 
letters.” 

“Then you can hardly complain that you get no 
warning of visitors,” said Ogden tartly. “I am here 
following a serious breach of Wizarding law, which 
occurred here in the early hours of this morning — ” 

“All right, all right, all right!” bellowed Gaunt. “Come 
in the bleeding house, then, and much good it’ll do 
you!” 

The house seemed to contain three tiny rooms. Two 
doors led off the main room, which served as kitchen 
and living room combined. Morfin was sitting in a 
filthy armchair beside the smoking fire, twisting a live 

Page | 228 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




adder between his thick fingers and crooning softly at 
it in Parseltongue: 

Hissy, hissy, little snakey, 

Slither on the floor, 

You be good to Morfin 
Or hell nail you to the door. 

There was a scuffling noise in the corner beside the 
open window, and Harry realized that there was 
somebody else in the room, a girl whose ragged gray 
dress was the exact color of the dirty stone wall 
behind her. She was standing beside a steaming pot 
on a grimy black stove, and was fiddling around with 
the shelf of squalid-looking pots and pans above it. 
Her hair was lank and dull and she had a plain, pale, 
rather heavy face. Her eyes, like her brother’s, stared 
in opposite directions. She looked a little cleaner than 
the two men, but Harry thought he had never seen a 
more defeated-looking person. 

“M’daughter, Merope,” said Gaunt grudgingly, as 
Ogden looked inquiringly toward her. 

“Good morning,” said Ogden. 

She did not answer, but with a frightened glance at 
her father turned her back on the room and 
continued shifting the pots on the shelf behind her. 

“Well, Mr. Gaunt,” said Ogden, “to get straight to the 
point, we have reason to believe that your son, 

Morfin, performed magic in front of a Muggle late last 
night.” 

There was a deafening clang. Merope had dropped 
one of the pots. 



Page | 229 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Pick it up\” Gaunt bellowed at her. “That’s it, grub on 
the floor like some filthy Muggle, what’s your wand 
for, you useless sack of muck?” 

“Mr. Gaunt, please!” said Ogden in a shocked voice, 
as Merope, who had already picked up the pot, 
flushed blotchily scarlet, lost her grip on the pot 
again, drew her wand shakily from her pocket, 
pointed it at the pot, and muttered a hasty, inaudible 
spell that caused the pot to shoot across the floor 
away from her, hit the opposite wall, and crack in 
two. 

Morfin let out a mad cackle of laughter. Gaunt 
screamed, “Mend it, you pointless lump, mend it!” 

Merope stumbled across the room, but before she had 
time to raise her wand, Ogden had lifted his own and 
said firmly, “Reparo.” The pot mended itself instantly. 

Gaunt looked for a moment as though he was going to 
shout at Ogden, but seemed to think better of it: 
Instead, he jeered at his daughter, “Lucky the nice 
man from the Ministry’s here, isn’t it? Perhaps he’ll 
take you off my hands, perhaps he doesn’t mind dirty 
Squibs. ...” 

Without looking at anybody or thanking Ogden, 
Merope picked up the pot and returned it, hands 
trembling, to its shelf. She then stood quite still, her 
back against the wall between the filthy window and 
the stove, as though she wished for nothing more 
than to sink into the stone and vanish. 

“Mr. Gaunt,” Ogden began again, “as I’ve said: the 
reason for my visit — ” 



Page | 230 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I heard you the first time!” snapped Gaunt. “And so 
what? Morfin gave a Muggle a bit of what was coming 
to him — what about it, then?” 

“Morfin has broken Wizarding law,” said Ogden 
sternly. 

“ ‘Morfin has broken Wizarding law.’ ” Gaunt imitated 
Ogden’s voice, making it pompous and singsong. 
Morfin cackled again. “He taught a filthy Muggle a 
lesson, that’s illegal now, is it?” 

“Yes,” said Ogden. “I’m afraid it is.” 

He pulled from an inside pocket a small scroll of 
parchment and unrolled it. 

“What’s that, then, his sentence?” said Gaunt, his 
voice rising angrily. 

“It is a summons to the Ministry for a hearing — ” 

“Summons! Summons? Who do you think you are, 
summoning my son anywhere?” 

“I’m Head of the Magical Law Enforcement Squad,” 
said Ogden. 

“And you think we’re scum, do you?” screamed 
Gaunt, advancing on Ogden now, with a dirty yellow- 
nailed finger pointing at his chest. “Scum who’ll come 
running when the Ministry tells ’em to? Do you know 
who you’re talking to, you filthy little Mudblood, do 
you? 

“I was under the impression that I was speaking to 
Mr. Gaunt,” said Ogden, looking wary, but standing 
his ground. 



Page | 231 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“That’s right!” roared Gaunt. For a moment, Harry 
thought Gaunt was making an obscene hand gesture, 
but then realized that he was showing Ogden the 
ugly, black- stoned ring he was wearing on his middle 
finger, waving it before Ogden’s eyes. “See this? See 
this? Know what it is? Know where it came from? 
Centuries it’s been in our family, that’s how far back 
we go, and pure-blood all the way! Know how much 
I’ve been offered for this, with the Peverell coat of 
arms engraved on the stone?” 

“I’ve really no idea,” said Ogden, blinking as the ring 
sailed within an inch of his nose, “and it’s quite 
beside the point, Mr. Gaunt. Your son has committed 



With a howl of rage, Gaunt ran toward his daughter. 
For a split second, Harry thought he was going to 
throttle her as his hand flew to her throat; next 
moment, he was dragging her toward Ogden by a gold 
chain around her neck. 

“See this?” he bellowed at Ogden, shaking a heavy 
gold locket at him, while Merope spluttered and 
gasped for breath. 

“I see it, I see it!” said Ogden hastily. 

“Slytherin’sl” yelled Gaunt. “Salazar Slytherin’s! We’re 
his last living descendants, what do you say to that, 
eh?” 

“Mr. Gaunt, your daughter!” said Ogden in alarm, but 
Gaunt had already released Merope; she staggered 
away from him, back to her corner, massaging her 
neck and gulping for air. 

“So!” said Gaunt triumphantly, as though he had just 
proved a complicated point beyond all possible 

Page | 232 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




dispute. “Don’t you go talking to us as if we’re dirt on 
your shoes! Generations of purebloods, wizards all — 
more than you can say, I don’t doubt!” 

And he spat on the floor at Ogden’s feet. Morfin 
cackled again. Merope, huddled beside the window, 
her head bowed and her face hidden by her lank hair, 
said nothing. 

“Mr. Gaunt,” said Ogden doggedly, “I am afraid that 
neither your ancestors nor mine have anything to do 
with the matter in hand. I am here because of Morfin, 
Morfin and the Muggle he accosted late last night. 

Our information” — he glanced down at his scroll of 
parchment — “is that Morfin performed a jinx or hex 
on the said Muggle, causing him to erupt in highly 
painful hives.” 

Morfin giggled. 

“ Be quiet, boy,” snarled Gaunt in Parseltongue, and 
Morfin fell silent again. 

“And so what if he did, then?” Gaunt said defiantly to 
Ogden. “I expect you’ve wiped the Muggle ’s filthy face 
clean for him, and his memory to boot — ” 

“That’s hardly the point, is it, Mr. Gaunt?” said 
Ogden. “This was an unprovoked attack on a 
defenseless — ” 

“Ar, I had you marked out as a Muggle-lover the 
moment I saw you,” sneered Gaunt, and he spat on 
the floor again. 

“This discussion is getting us nowhere,” said Ogden 
firmly. “It is clear from your son’s attitude that he 
feels no remorse for his actions.” He glanced down at 
his scroll of parchment again. “Morfin will attend a 

Page | 233 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




hearing on the fourteenth of September to answer the 
charges of using magic in front of a Muggle and 
causing harm and distress to that same Mugg — ” 

Ogden broke off. The jingling, clopping sounds of 
horses and loud, laughing voices were drifting in 
through the open window. Apparently the winding 
lane to the village passed very close to the copse 
where the house stood. Gaunt froze, listening, his 
eyes wide. Morfin hissed and turned his face toward 
the sounds, his expression hungry. Merope raised her 
head. Her face, Harry saw, was starkly white. 

“My God, what an eyesore!” rang out a girl’s voice, as 
clearly audible through the open window as if she had 
stood in the room beside them. “Couldn’t your father 
have that hovel cleared away, Tom?” 

“It’s not ours,” said a young man’s voice. “Everything 
on the other side of the valley belongs to us, but that 
cottage belongs to an old tramp called Gaunt, and his 
children. The son’s quite mad, you should hear some 
of the stories they tell in the village — ” 

The girl laughed. The jingling, clopping noises were 
growing louder and louder. Morfin made to get out of 
his armchair. 

“Keep your seat,” said his father warningly, in 
Parseltongue. 

“Tom,” said the girl’s voice again, now so close they 
were clearly right beside the house, “I might be wrong 
— but has somebody nailed a snake to that door?” 

“Good lord, you’re right!” said the man’s voice. “That’ll 
be the son, I told you he’s not right in the head. Don’t 
look at it, Cecilia, darling.” 



Page | 234 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




The jingling and clopping sounds were now growing 
fainter again. 

“ ‘Darling,’ ” whispered Morfin in Parseltongue, 
looking at his sister. “ ‘Darling,’ he called her. So he 
wouldn’t have you anyway.” 

Merope was so white Harry felt sure she was going to 
faint. 

“What’s that?” said Gaunt sharply, also in 
Parseltongue, looking from his son to his daughter. 

“ What did you say, Morfin?” 

“She likes looking at that Muggle,” said Morfin, a 
vicious expression on his face as he stared at his 
sister, who now looked terrified. “Always in the 
garden when he passes, peering through the hedge at 
him, isn’t she? And last night — ” 

Merope shook her head jerkily, imploringly, but 
Morfin went on ruthlessly, “Hanging out of the 
window waiting for him to ride home, wasn’t she?” 

“Hanging out of the window to look at a Muggle?” said 
Gaunt quietly. 

All three of the Gaunts seemed to have forgotten 
Ogden, who was looking both bewildered and irritated 
at this renewed outbreak of incomprehensible hissing 
and rasping. 

“Is it true?” said Gaunt in a deadly voice, advancing a 
step or two toward the terrified girl. “My daughter — 
pure-blooded descendant of Salazar Slytherin — 
hankering after a filthy, dirt-veined Muggle?” 

Merope shook her head frantically, pressing herself 
into the wall, apparently unable to speak. 

Page | 235 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“But I got him, FatheA” cackled Morfin. “I got him as 
he went by and he didn’t look so pretty with hives all 
over him, did he, Merope?” 

“You disgusting little Squib, you filthy little blood 
traitoA.” roared Gaunt, losing control, and his hands 
closed around his daughter’s throat. 

Both Harry and Ogden yelled “No!” at the same time; 
Ogden raised his wand and cried, “Relashiol” Gaunt 
was thrown backward, away from his daughter; he 
tripped over a chair and fell flat on his back. With a 
roar of rage, Morfin leapt out of his chair and ran at 
Ogden, brandishing his bloody knife and firing hexes 
indiscriminately from his wand. 

Ogden ran for his life. Dumbledore indicated that they 
ought to follow and Harry obeyed, Merope ’s screams 
echoing in his ears. 

Ogden hurtled up the path and erupted onto the main 
lane, his arms over his head, where he collided with 
the glossy chestnut horse ridden by a very handsome, 
dark-haired young man. Both he and the pretty girl 
riding beside him on a gray horse roared with 
laughter at the sight of Ogden, who bounced off the 
horse’s flank and set off again, his frock coat flying, 
covered from head to foot in dust, running pell-mell 
up the lane. 

“I think that will do, Harry,” said Dumbledore. He 
took Harry by the elbow and tugged. Next moment, 
they were both soaring weightlessly through 
darkness, until they landed squarely on their feet, 
back in Dumbledore ’s now twilit office. 

“What happened to the girl in the cottage?” said Harry 
at once, as Dumbledore lit extra lamps with a flick of 
his wand. “Merope, or whatever her name was?” 

Page | 236 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh, she survived,” said Dumbledore, reseating 
himself behind his desk and indicating that Harry 
should sit down too. “Ogden Apparated back to the 
Ministry and returned with reinforcements within 
fifteen minutes. Morfin and his father attempted to 
fight, but both were overpowered, removed from the 
cottage, and subsequently convicted by the 
Wizengamot. Morfin, who already had a record of 
Muggle attacks, was sentenced to three years in 
Azkaban. Marvolo, who had injured several Ministry 
employees in addition to Ogden, received six months.” 

“Marvolo?” Harry repeated wonderingly. 

“That’s right,” said Dumbledore, smiling in approval. 

“I am glad to see you’re keeping up.” 

“That old man was — ?” 

“Voldemort’s grandfather, yes,” said Dumbledore. 
“Marvolo, his son, Morfin, and his daughter, Merope, 
were the last of the Gaunts, a very ancient Wizarding 
family noted for a vein of instability and violence that 
flourished through the generations due to their habit 
of marrying their own cousins. Lack of sense coupled 
with a great liking for grandeur meant that the family 
gold was squandered several generations before 
Marvolo was born. He, as you saw, was left in squalor 
and poverty, with a very nasty temper, a fantastic 
amount of arrogance and pride, and a couple of 
family heirlooms that he treasured just as much as 
his son, and rather more than his daughter.” 

“So Merope,” said Harry, leaning forward in his chair 
and staring at Dumbledore, “so Merope was ... Sir, 
does that mean she was ... Voldemort’s mother?” 



Page | 237 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“It does,” said Dumbledore. “And it so happens that 
we also had a glimpse of Voldemort’s father. I wonder 
whether you noticed?” 

“The Muggle Morfin attacked? The man on the 
horse?” 

“Very good indeed,” said Dumbledore, beaming. “Yes, 
that was Tom Riddle senior, the handsome Muggle 
who used to go riding past the Gaunt cottage and for 
whom Merope Gaunt cherished a secret, burning 
passion.” 

“And they ended up married?” Harry said in disbelief, 
unable to imagine two people less likely to fall in love. 

“I think you are forgetting,” said Dumbledore, “that 
Merope was a witch. I do not believe that her magical 
powers appeared to their best advantage when she 
was being terrorized by her father. Once Marvolo and 
Morfin were safely in Azkaban, once she was alone 
and free for the first time in her life, then, I am sure, 
she was able to give full rein to her abilities and to 
plot her escape from the desperate life she had led for 
eighteen years. 

“Can you not think of any measure Merope could 
have taken to make Tom Riddle forget his Muggle 
companion, and fall in love with her instead?” 

“The Imperius Curse?” Harry suggested. “Or a love 
potion?” 

“Very good. Personally, I am inclined to think that she 
used a love potion. I am sure it would have seemed 
more romantic to her, and I do not think it would 
have been very difficult, some hot day, when Riddle 
was riding alone, to persuade him to take a drink of 
water. In any case, within a few months of the scene 
Page | 238 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




we have just witnessed, the village of Little Hangleton 
enjoyed a tremendous scandal. You can imagine the 
gossip it caused when the squire’s son ran off with 
the tramp’s daughter, Merope. 

“But the villagers’ shock was nothing to Marvolo’s. He 
returned from Azkaban, expecting to find his 
daughter dutifully awaiting his return with a hot meal 
ready on his table. Instead, he found a clear inch of 
dust and her note of farewell, explaining what she 
had done. 

“From all that I have been able to discover, he never 
mentioned her name or existence from that time 
forth. The shock of her desertion may have 
contributed to his early death — or perhaps he had 
simply never learned to feed himself. Azkaban had 
greatly weakened Marvolo, and he did not live to see 
Morfin return to the cottage.” 

“And Merope? She ... she died, didn’t she? Wasn’t 
Voldemort brought up in an orphanage?” 

“Yes, indeed,” said Dumbledore. “We must do a 
certain amount of guessing here, although I do not 
think it is difficult to deduce what happened. You see, 
within a few months of their runaway marriage, Tom 
Riddle reappeared at the manor house in Little 
Hangleton without his wife. The rumor flew around 
the neighborhood that he was talking of being 
‘hoodwinked’ and ‘taken in.’ What he meant, I am 
sure, is that he had been under an enchantment that 
had now lifted, though I daresay he did not dare use 
those precise words for fear of being thought insane. 
When they heard what he was saying, however, the 
villagers guessed that Merope had lied to Tom Riddle, 
pretending that she was going to have his baby, and 
that he had married her for this reason.” 



Page | 239 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“But she did have his baby.” 



“But not until a year after they were married. Tom 
Riddle left her while she was still pregnant.” 

“What went wrong?” asked Harry. “Why did the love 
potion stop working?” 

“Again, this is guesswork,” said Dumbledore, “but I 
believe that Merope, who was deeply in love with her 
husband, could not bear to continue enslaving him by 
magical means. I believe that she made the choice to 
stop giving him the potion. Perhaps, besotted as she 
was, she had convinced herself that he would by now 
have fallen in love with her in return. Perhaps she 
thought he would stay for the baby’s sake. If so, she 
was wrong on both counts. He left her, never saw her 
again, and never troubled to discover what became of 
his son.” 

The sky outside was inky black and the lamps in 
Dumbledore ’s office seemed to glow more brightly 
than before. 

“I think that will do for tonight, Harry,” said 
Dumbledore after a moment or two. 

“Yes, sir,” said Harry. 

He got to his feet, but did not leave. 

“Sir ... is it important to know all this about 
Voldemort’s past?” 

“Very important, I think,” said Dumbledore. 

“And it ... it’s got something to do with the prophecy?” 

“It has everything to do with the prophecy.” 

Page | 240 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Right,” said Harry, a little confused, but reassured 
all the same. 

He turned to go, then another question occurred to 
him, and he turned back again. “Sir, am I allowed to 
tell Ron and Hermione everything you’ve told me?” 

Dumbledore considered him for a moment, then said, 
“Yes, I think Mr. Weasley and Miss Granger have 
proved themselves trustworthy. But Harry, I am going 
to ask you to ask them not to repeat any of this to 
anybody else. It would not be a good idea if word got 
around how much I know, or suspect, about Lord 
Voldemort’s secrets.” 

“No, sir, I’ll make sure it’s just Ron and Hermione. 
Good night.” 

He turned away again, and was almost at the door 
when he saw it. Sitting on one of the little spindle- 
legged tables that supported so many frail-looking 
silver instruments, was an ugly gold ring set with a 
large, cracked, black stone. 

“Sir,” said Harry, staring at it. “That ring — ” 

“Yes?” said Dumbledore. 

“You were wearing it when we visited Professor 
Slughorn that night.” 

“So I was,” Dumbledore agreed. 

“But isn’t it ... sir, isn’t it the same ring Marvolo 
Gaunt showed Ogden?” 

Dumbledore bowed his head. “The very same.” 

“But how come — ? Have you always had it?” 

Page | 241 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No, I acquired it very recently,” said Dumbledore. “A 
few days before I came to fetch you from your aunt 
and uncle’s, in fact.” 

“That would be around the time you injured your 
hand, then, sir?” 

“Around that time, yes, Harry.” 

Harry hesitated. Dumbledore was smiling. 

“Sir, how exactly — ?” 

“Too late, Harry! You shall hear the story another 
time. Good night.” 

“Good night, sir.” 



Page | 242 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






HERMIONE’S HELPING HAND 

As Hermione had predicted, the sixth years’ free 
periods were not the hours of blissful relaxation Ron 
had anticipated, but times in which to attempt to 
keep up with the vast amount of homework they were 
being set. Not only were they studying as though they 
had exams every day, but the lessons themselves had 
become more demanding than ever before. Harry 
barely understood half of what Professor McGonagall 
said to them these days; even Hermione had had to 
ask her to repeat instructions once or twice. 
Incredibly, and to Hermione ’s increasing resentment, 
Harry’s best subject had suddenly become Potions, 
thanks to the Half-Blood Prince. 

Nonverbal spells were now expected, not only in 
Defense Against the Dark Arts, but in Charms and 
Transfiguration too. Harry frequently looked over at 
his classmates in the common room or at mealtimes 
to see them purple in the face and straining as 
though they had overdosed on U-No-Poo; but he knew 
that they were really struggling to make spells work 



Page | 243 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



without saying incantations aloud. It was a relief to 
get outside into the greenhouses; they were dealing 
with more dangerous plants than ever in Herbology, 
but at least they were still allowed to swear loudly if 
the Venomous Tentacula seized them unexpectedly 
from behind. 

One result of their enormous workload and the frantic 
hours of practicing nonverbal spells was that Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione had so far been unable to find 
time to go and visit Hagrid. He had stopped coming to 
meals at the staff table, an ominous sign, and on the 
few occasions when they had passed him in the 
corridors or out in the grounds, he had mysteriously 
failed to notice them or hear their greetings. 

“We’ve got to go and explain,” said Hermione, looking 
up at Hagrid ’s huge empty chair at the staff table the 
following Saturday at breakfast. 

“We’ve got Quidditch tryouts this morning!” said Ron. 
“And we’re supposed to be practicing that Aguamenti 
Charm from Flitwick! Anyway, explain what? How are 
we going to tell him we hated his stupid subject?” 

“We didn’t hate it!” said Hermione. 

“Speak for yourself, I haven’t forgotten the skrewts,” 
said Ron darkly. “And I’m telling you now, we’ve had a 
narrow escape. You didn’t hear him going on about 
his gormless brother — we’d have been teaching 
Grawp how to tie his shoelaces if we’d stayed.” 

“I hate not talking to Hagrid,” said Hermione, looking 
upset. 

“Well go down after Quidditch,” Harry assured her. 

He too was missing Hagrid, although like Ron he 
thought that they were better off without Grawp in 

Page | 244 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




their lives. “But trials might take all morning, the 
number of people who have applied.” He felt slightly 
nervous at confronting the first hurdle of his 
Captaincy. “I dunno why the team’s this popular all of 
a sudden.” 

“Oh, come on, Harry,” said Hermione, suddenly 
impatient. “It’s not Quidditch that’s popular, it’s you! 
You’ve never been more interesting, and frankly, 
you’ve never been more fanciable.” 

Ron gagged on a large piece of kipper. Hermione 
spared him one look of disdain before turning back to 
Harry. 

“Everyone knows you’ve been telling the truth now, 
don’t they? The whole Wizarding world has had to 
admit that you were right about Voldemort being back 
and that you really have fought him twice in the last 
two years and escaped both times. And now they’re 
calling you ‘the Chosen One’ — well, come on, can’t 
you see why people are fascinated by you?” 

Harry was finding the Great Hall very hot all of a 
sudden, even though the ceiling still looked cold and 
rainy. 

“And you’ve been through all that persecution from 
the Ministry when they were trying to make out you 
were unstable and a liar. You can still see the marks 
on the back of your hand where that evil woman 
made you write with your own blood, but you stuck to 
your story anyway. ...” 

“You can still see where those brains got hold of me in 
the Ministry, look,” said Ron, shaking back his 
sleeves. 



Page | 245 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“And it doesn’t hurt that you’ve grown about a foot 
over the summer either,” Hermione finished, ignoring 
Ron. 

“I’m tall,” said Ron inconsequentially. 

The post owls arrived, swooping down through rain- 
flecked windows, scattering everyone with droplets of 
water. Most people were receiving more post than 
usual; anxious parents were keen to hear from their 
children and to reassure them, in turn, that all was 
well at home. Harry had received no mail since the 
start of term; his only regular correspondent was now 
dead and although he had hoped that Lupin might 
write occasionally, he had so far been disappointed. 
He was very surprised, therefore, to see the snowy 
white Hedwig circling amongst all the brown and gray 
owls. She landed in front of him carrying a large, 
square package. A moment later, an identical package 
landed in front of Ron, crushing beneath it his 
minuscule and exhausted owl, Pigwidgeon. 

“Ha!” said Harry, unwrapping the parcel to reveal a 
new copy of Advanced Potion-Making, fresh from 
Flourish and Blotts. 

“Oh good,” said Hermione, delighted. “Now you can 
give that graffitied copy back.” 

“Are you mad?” said Harry. “I’m keeping it! Look, I’ve 
thought it out — ” 

He pulled the old copy of Advanced Potion-Making out 
of his bag and tapped the cover with his wand, 
muttering, “Diffindol” The cover fell off. He did the 
same thing with the brand-new book (Hermione 
looked scandalized). He then swapped the covers, 
tapped each, and said, “Reparo\” 



Page | 246 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




There sat the Prince’s copy, disguised as a new book, 
and there sat the fresh copy from Flourish and Blotts, 
looking thoroughly secondhand. 

“I’ll give Slughorn back the new one, he can’t 
complain, it cost nine Galleons.” 

Hermione pressed her lips together, looking angry 
and disapproving, but was distracted by a third owl 
landing in front of her carrying that day’s copy of the 
Daily Prophet. She unfolded it hastily and scanned 
the front page. 

“Anyone we know dead?” asked Ron in a determinedly 
casual voice; he posed the same question every time 
Hermione opened her paper. 

“No, but there have been more dementor attacks,” 
said Hermione. “And an arrest.” 

“Excellent, who?” said Harry, thinking of Bellatrix 
Lestrange. 

“Stan Shunpike,” said Hermione. 

“What?” said Harry, startled. 

“ ‘Stanley Shunpike , conductor on the popular 
Wizarding conveyance the Knight Bus, has been 
arrested on suspicion of Death Eater activity. Mr. 
Shunpike, 21, was taken into custody late last night 
after a raid on his Clapham home ...’ ” 

“Stan Shunpike, a Death Eater?” said Harry, 
remembering the spotty youth he had first met three 
years before. “No way!” 

“He might have been put under the Imperius Curse,” 
said Ron reasonably. “You never can tell.” 

Page | 247 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“It doesn’t look like it,” said Hermione, who was still 
reading. “It says here he was arrested after he was 
overheard talking about the Death Eaters’ secret 
plans in a pub.” She looked up with a troubled 
expression on her face. “If he was under the Imperius 
Curse, he’d hardly stand around gossiping about 
their plans, would he?” 

“It sounds like he was trying to make out he knew 
more than he did,” said Ron. “Isn’t he the one who 
claimed he was going to become Minister of Magic 
when he was trying to chat up those veela?” 

“Yeah, that’s him,” said Harry. “I dunno what they’re 
playing at, taking Stan seriously.” 

“They probably want to look as though they’re doing 
something,” said Hermione, frowning. “People are 
terrified — you know the Patil twins’ parents want 
them to go home? And Eloise Midgen has already 
been withdrawn. Her father picked her up last night.” 

“What!” said Ron, goggling at Hermione. “But 
Hogwarts is safer than their homes, bound to be! 
We’ve got Aurors, and all those extra protective spells, 
and we’ve got Dumbledore!” 

“I don’t think we’ve got him all the time,” said 
Hermione very quietly, glancing toward the staff table 
over the top of the Prophet “Haven’t you noticed? His 
seat’s been empty as often as Hagrid’s this past 
week.” 

Harry and Ron looked up at the staff table. The 
headmaster’s chair was indeed empty. Now Harry 
came to think of it, he had not seen Dumbledore 
since their private lesson a week ago. 



Page | 248 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I think he’s left the school to do something with the 
Order,” said Hermione in a low voice. “I mean ... it’s 
all looking serious, isn’t it? 

Harry and Ron did not answer, but Harry knew that 
they were all thinking the same thing. There had been 
a horrible incident the day before, when Hannah 
Abbott had been taken out of Herbology to be told her 
mother had been found dead. They had not seen 
Hannah since. 

When they left the Gryffindor table five minutes later 
to head down to the Quidditch pitch, they passed 
Lavender Brown and Parvati Patil. Remembering what 
Hermione had said about the Patil twins’ parents 
wanting them to leave Hogwarts, Harry was 
unsurprised to see that the two best friends were 
whispering together, looking distressed. What did 
surprise him was that when Ron drew level with 
them, Parvati suddenly nudged Lavender, who looked 
around and gave Ron a wide smile. Ron blinked at 
her, then returned the smile uncertainly. His walk 
instantly became something more like a strut. Harry 
resisted the temptation to laugh, remembering that 
Ron had refrained from doing so after Malfoy had 
broken Harry’s nose; Hermione, however, looked cold 
and distant all the way down to the stadium through 
the cool, misty drizzle, and departed to find a place in 
the stands without wishing Ron good luck. 

As Harry had expected, the trials took most of the 
morning. Half of Gryffindor House seemed to have 
turned up, from first years who were nervously 
clutching a selection of the dreadful old school 
brooms, to seventh years who towered over the rest, 
looking coolly intimidating. The latter included a 
large, wiry-haired boy Harry recognized immediately 
from the Hogwarts Express. 



Page | 249 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“We met on the train, in old Sluggy’s compartment,” 
he said confidently, stepping out of the crowd to 
shake Harry’s hand. “Cormac McLaggen, Keeper.” 

“You didn’t try out last year, did you?” asked Harry, 
taking note of the breadth of McLaggen and thinking 
that he would probably block all three goal hoops 
without even moving. 

“I was in the hospital wing when they held the trials,” 
said McLaggen, with something of a swagger. “Ate a 
pound of doxy eggs for a bet.” 

“Right,” said Harry. “Well ... if you wait over there ...” 

He pointed over to the edge of the pitch, close to 
where Hermione was sitting. He thought he saw a 
flicker of annoyance pass over McLaggen’s face and 
wondered whether McLaggen expected preferential 
treatment because they were both “old Sluggy’s” 
favorites. 

Harry decided to start with a basic test, asking all 
applicants for the team to divide into groups of ten 
and fly once around the pitch. This was a good 
decision: The first ten was made up of first years and 
it could not have been plainer that they had hardly 
ever flown before. Only one boy managed to remain 
airborne for more than a few seconds, and he was so 
surprised he promptly crashed into one of the goal 
posts. 

The second group was comprised of ten of the silliest 
girls Harry had ever encountered, who, when he blew 
his whistle, merely fell about giggling and clutching 
one another. Romilda Vane was amongst them. When 
he told them to leave the pitch, they did so quite 
cheerfully and went to sit in the stands to heckle 
everyone else. 

Page | 250 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




The third group had a pileup halfway around the 
pitch. Most of the fourth group had come without 
broomsticks. The fifth group were Hufflepuffs. 

“If there’s anyone else here who’s not from 
Gryffindor,” roared Harry, who was starting to get 
seriously annoyed, “leave now, please!” 

There was a pause, then a couple of little Ravenclaws 
went sprinting off the pitch, snorting with laughter. 

After two hours, many complaints, and several 
tantrums, one involving a crashed Comet Two Sixty 
and several broken teeth, Harry had found himself 
three Chasers: Katie Bell, returned to the team after 
an excellent trial; a new find called Demelza Robins, 
who was particularly good at dodging Bludgers; and 
Ginny Weasley, who had outflown all the competition 
and scored seventeen goals to boot. Pleased though 
he was with his choices, Harry had also shouted 
himself hoarse at the many complainers and was now 
enduring a similar battle with the rejected Beaters. 

“That’s my final decision and if you don’t get out of 
the way for the Keepers I’ll hex you,” he bellowed. 

Neither of his chosen Beaters had the old brilliance of 
Fred and George, but he was still reasonably pleased 
with them: Jimmy Peakes, a short but broad-chested 
third-year boy who had managed to raise a lump the 
size of an egg on the back of Harry’s head with a 
ferociously hit Bludger, and Ritchie Coote, who looked 
weedy but aimed well. They now joined Katie, 

Demelza, and Ginny in the stands to watch the 
selection of their last team member. 

Harry had deliberately left the trial of the Keepers 
until last, hoping for an emptier stadium and less 
pressure on all concerned. Unfortunately, however, all 

Page | 251 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




the rejected players and a number of people who had 
come down to watch after a lengthy breakfast had 
joined the crowd by now, so that it was larger than 
ever. As each Keeper flew up to the goal hoops, the 
crowd roared and jeered in equal measure. Harry 
glanced over at Ron, who had always had a problem 
with nerves; Harry had hoped that winning their final 
match last term might have cured it, but apparently 
not: Ron was a delicate shade of green. 

None of the first five applicants saved more than two 
goals apiece. To Harry’s great disappointment, 

Cormac McLaggen saved four penalties out of five. On 
the last one, however, he shot off in completely the 
wrong direction; the crowd laughed and booed and 
McLaggen returned to the ground grinding his teeth. 

Ron looked ready to pass out as he mounted his 
Cleansweep Eleven. “Good luck!” cried a voice from 
the stands. Harry looked around, expecting to see 
Hermione, but it was Lavender Brown. He would have 
quite liked to have hidden his face in his hands, as 
she did a moment later, but thought that as the 
Captain he ought to show slightly more grit, and so 
turned to watch Ron do his trial. 

Yet he need not have worried: Ron saved one, two, 
three, four, five penalties in a row. Delighted, and 
resisting joining in the cheers of the crowd with 
difficulty, Harry turned to McLaggen to tell him that, 
most unfortunately, Ron had beaten him, only to find 
McLaggen’s red face inches from his own. He stepped 
back hastily. 

“His sister didn’t really try,” said McLaggen 
menacingly. There was a vein pulsing in his temple 
like the one Harry had often admired in Uncle 
Vernon’s. “She gave him an easy save.” 



Page | 252 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Rubbish,” said Harry coldly. “That was the one he 
nearly missed.” 

McLaggen took a step nearer Harry, who stood his 
ground this time. 

“Give me another go.” 

“No,” said Harry. “You’ve had your go. You saved four. 
Ron saved five. Ron’s Keeper, he won it fair and 
square. Get out of my way.” 

He thought for a moment that McLaggen might punch 
him, but he contented himself with an ugly grimace 
and stormed away, growling what sounded like 
threats to thin air. 

Harry turned around to find his new team beaming at 
him. 

“Well done,” he croaked. “You flew really well — ” 

“You did brilliantly, Ron!” 

This time it really was Hermione running toward 
them from the stands; Harry saw Lavender walking 
off the pitch, arm in arm with Parvati, a rather 
grumpy expression on her face. Ron looked extremely 
pleased with himself and even taller than usual as he 
grinned at the team and at Hermione. 

After fixing the time of their first full practice for the 
following Thursday, Harry, Ron, and Hermione bade 
good-bye to the rest of the team and headed off 
toward Hagrid’s. A watery sun was trying to break 
through the clouds now and it had stopped drizzling 
at last. Harry felt extremely hungry; he hoped there 
would be something to eat at Hagrid’s. 



Page | 253 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I thought I was going to miss that fourth penalty,” 
Ron was saying happily. “Tricky shot from Demelza, 
did you see, had a bit of spin on it — ” 

“Yes, yes, you were magnificent,” said Hermione, 
looking amused. 

“I was better than that McLaggen anyway,” said Ron 
in a highly satisfied voice. “Did you see him 
lumbering off in the wrong direction on his fifth? 
Looked like he’d been Confunded. ...” 

To Harry’s surprise, Hermione turned a very deep 
shade of pink at these words. Ron noticed nothing; he 
was too busy describing each of his other penalties in 
loving detail. 

The great gray hippogriff, Buckbeak, was tethered in 
front of Hagrid’s cabin. He clicked his razor-sharp 
beak at their approach and turned his huge head 
toward them. 

“Oh dear,” said Hermione nervously. “He’s still a bit 
scary, isn’t he?” 

“Come off it, you’ve ridden him, haven’t you?” said 
Ron. 

Harry stepped forward and bowed low to the 
hippogriff without breaking eye contact or blinking. 
After a few seconds, Buckbeak sank into a bow too. 

“How are you?” Harry asked him in a low voice, 
moving forward to stroke the feathery head. “Missing 
him? But you’re okay here with Hagrid, aren’t you?” 

“Oi!” said a loud voice. 



Page | 254 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid had come striding around the corner of his 
cabin wearing a large flowery apron and carrying a 
sack of potatoes. His enormous boarhound, Fang, 
was at his heels; Fang gave a booming bark and 
bounded forward. 

“Git away from him! Hell have yer fingers — oh. It’s 
yeh lot.” 

Fang was jumping up at Hermione and Ron, 
attempting to lick their ears. Hagrid stood and looked 
at them all for a split second, then turned and strode 
into his cabin, slamming the door behind him. 

“Oh dear!” said Hermione, looking stricken. 

“Don’t worry about it,” said Harry grimly. He walked 
over to the door and knocked loudly. 

“Hagrid! Open up, we want to talk to you!” 

There was no sound from within. 

“If you don’t open the door, we’ll blast it open!” Harry 
said, pulling out his wand. 

“Harry!” said Hermione, sounding shocked. “You can’t 
possibly — ” 

“Yeah, I can!” said Harry. “Stand back — ” 

But before he could say anything else, the door flew 
open again as Harry had known it would, and there 
stood Hagrid, glowering down at him and looking, 
despite the flowery apron, positively alarming. 

“I’m a teacher!” he roared at Harry. “A teacher, Potter! 
How dare yeh threaten ter break down my door!” 



Page | 255 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




‘Tm sorry, sir,” said Harry, emphasizing the last word 
as he stowed his wand inside his robes. 

Hagrid looked stunned. “Since when have yeh called 
me ‘sir’?” 



“Since when have you called me ‘Potter’?” 

“Oh, very clever,” growled Hagrid. “Very amusin’. 
That’s me outsmarted, innit? All righ’, come in then, 
yeh ungrateful little ...” 

Mumbling darkly, he stood back to let them pass. 
Hermione scurried in after Harry, looking rather 
frightened. 

“Well?” said Hagrid grumpily, as Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione sat down around his enormous wooden 
table, Fang laying his head immediately upon Harry’s 
knee and drooling all over his robes. “What’s this? 
Feelin’ sorry for me? Reckon I’m lonely or summat?” 

“No,” said Harry at once. “We wanted to see you.” 

“We’ve missed you!” said Hermione tremulously. 

“Missed me, have yeh?” snorted Hagrid. “Yeah. Righ’.” 

He stomped around, brewing up tea in his enormous 
copper kettle, muttering all the while. Finally he 
slammed down three bucket-sized mugs of 
mahogany-brown tea in front of them and a plate of 
his rock cakes. Harry was hungry enough even for 
Hagrid’s cooking, and took one at once. 

“Hagrid,” said Hermione timidly, when he joined them 
at the table and started peeling his potatoes with a 
brutality that suggested that each tuber had done 



Page | 256 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




him a great personal wrong, “we really wanted to 
carry on with Care of Magical Creatures, you know.” 



Hagrid gave another great snort. Harry rather thought 
some bogeys landed on the potatoes, and was 
inwardly thankful that they were not staying for 
dinner. 

“We did!” said Hermione. “But none of us could fit it 
into our schedules!” 

“Yeah. Righ’,” said Hagrid again. 

There was a funny squelching sound and they all 
looked around: Hermione let out a tiny shriek, and 
Ron leapt out of his seat and hurried around the table 
away from the large barrel standing in the corner that 
they had only just noticed. It was full of what looked 
like foot-long maggots, slimy, white, and writhing. 

“What are they, Hagrid?” asked Harry, trying to sound 
interested rather than revolted, but putting down his 
rock cake all the same. 

“Jus’ giant grubs,” said Hagrid. 

“And they grow into ... ?” said Ron, looking 
apprehensive. 

“They won’ grow inter nuthin’,” said Hagrid. “I got ’em 
ter feed ter Aragog.” 

And without warning, he burst into tears. 

“Hagrid!” cried Hermione, leaping up, hurrying 
around the table the long way to avoid the barrel of 
maggots, and putting an arm around his shaking 
shoulders. “What is it?” 

Page | 257 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s ... him ...” gulped Hagrid, his beetle-black eyes 
streaming as he mopped his face with his apron. “It’s 
... Aragog. ... I think he’s dyin’. ... He got ill over the 
summer an’ he’s not gettin’ better. ... I don’ know 
what I’ll do if he ... if he ... We’ve bin tergether so 
long. ...” 

Hermione patted Hagrid’s shoulder, looking at a 
complete loss for anything to say. Harry knew how 
she felt. He had known Hagrid to present a vicious 
baby dragon with a teddy bear, seen him croon over 
giant scorpions with suckers and stingers, attempt to 
reason with his brutal giant of a half-brother, but this 
was perhaps the most incomprehensible of all his 
monster fancies: the gigantic talking spider, Aragog, 
who dwelled deep in the Forbidden Forest and which 
he and Ron had only narrowly escaped four years 
previously. 

“Is there — is there anything we can do?” Hermione 
asked, ignoring Ron’s frantic grimaces and head- 
shakings. 

“I don’ think there is, Hermione,” choked Hagrid, 
attempting to stem the flood of his tears. “See, the 
rest o’ the tribe ... Aragog’s family ... they’re gettin’ a 
bit funny now he’s ill ... bit restive ...” 

“Yeah, I think we saw a bit of that side of them,” said 
Ron in an undertone. 

"... I don’ reckon it’d be safe fer anyone but me ter go 
near the colony at the mo’,” Hagrid finished, blowing 
his nose hard on his apron and looking up. “But 
thanks fer offerin’, Hermione. ... It means a lot. ...” 

After that, the atmosphere lightened considerably, for 
although neither Harry nor Ron had shown any 
inclination to go and feed giant grubs to a murderous, 

Page | 258 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




gargantuan spider, Hagrid seemed to take it for 
granted that they would have liked to have done and 
became his usual self once more. 

“Ar, I always knew yeh’d find it hard ter squeeze me 
inter yer timetables,” he said gruffly, pouring them 
more tea. “Even if yeh applied fer Time-Turners — ” 

“We couldn’t have done,” said Hermione. “We 
smashed the entire stock of Ministry Time-Turners 
when we were there last summer. It was in the Daily 
Prophet.” 

“Ar, well then,” said Hagrid. “There’s no way yeh 
could’ve done it. ... I’m sorry I’ve bin — yeh know — 
I’ve jus’ bin worried abou’ Aragog ... an’ I did wonder 
whether, if Professor Grubbly-Plank had bin teachin’ 
yeh 

At which all three of them stated categorically and 
untruthfully that Professor Grubbly-Plank, who had 
substituted for Hagrid a few times, was a dreadful 
teacher, with the result that by the time Hagrid waved 
them off the premises at dusk, he looked quite 
cheerful. 

“I’m starving,” said Harry, once the door had closed 
behind them and they were hurrying through the 
dark and deserted grounds; he had abandoned the 
rock cake after an ominous cracking noise from one 
of his back teeth. “And I’ve got that detention with 
Snape tonight, I haven’t got much time for dinner. ...” 

As they came into the castle they spotted Cormac 
McLaggen entering the Great Hall. It took him two 
attempts to get through the doors; he ricocheted off 
the frame on the first attempt. Ron merely guffawed 
gloatingly and strode off into the Hall after him, but 
Harry caught Hermione ’s arm and held her back. 

Page | 259 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“What?” said Hermione defensively. 



“If you ask me,” said Harry quietly, “McLaggen looks 
like he was Confunded this morning. And he was 
standing right in front of where you were sitting.” 

Hermione blushed. 

“Oh, all right then, I did it,” she whispered. “But you 
should have heard the way he was talking about Ron 
and Ginny! Anyway, he’s got a nasty temper, you saw 
how he reacted when he didn’t get in — you wouldn’t 
have wanted someone like that on the team.” 

“No,” said Harry. “No, I suppose that’s true. But 
wasn’t that dishonest, Hermione? I mean, you’re a 
prefect, aren’t you?” 

“Oh, be quiet,” she snapped, as he smirked. 

“What are you two doing?” demanded Ron, 
reappearing in the doorway to the Great Hall and 
looking suspicious. 

“Nothing,” said Harry and Hermione together, and 
they hurried after Ron. The smell of roast beef made 
Harry’s stomach ache with hunger, but they had 
barely taken three steps toward the Gryffindor table 
when Professor Slughorn appeared in front of them, 
blocking their path. 

“Harry, Harry, just the man I was hoping to see!” he 
boomed genially, twiddling the ends of his walrus 
mustache and puffing out his enormous belly. “I was 
hoping to catch you before dinner! What do you say to 
a spot of supper tonight in my rooms instead? We’re 
having a little party, just a few rising stars, I’ve got 
McLaggen coming and Zabini, the charming Melinda 
Bobbin — I don’t know whether you know her? Her 
Page | 260 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




family owns a large chain of apothecaries — and, of 
course, I hope very much that Miss Granger will favor 
me by coming too.” 

Slughorn made Hermione a little bow as he finished 
speaking. It was as though Ron was not present; 
Slughorn did not so much as look at him. 

“I can’t come, Professor,” said Harry at once. “I’ve got 
a detention with Professor Snape.” 

“Oh dear!” said Slughorn, his face falling comically. 
“Dear, dear, I was counting on you, Harry! Well, now, 
I’ll just have to have a word with Severus and explain 
the situation. I’m sure I’ll be able to persuade him to 
postpone your detention. Yes, I’ll see you both later!” 

He bustled away out of the Hall. 

“He’s got no chance of persuading Snape,” said Harry, 
the moment Slughorn was out of earshot. “This 
detention’s already been postponed once; Snape did it 
for Dumbledore, but he won’t do it for anyone else.” 

“Oh, I wish you could come, I don’t want to go on my 
own!” said Hermione anxiously; Harry knew that she 
was thinking about McLaggen. 

“I doubt you’ll be alone, Ginny’ll probably be invited,” 
snapped Ron, who did not seem to have taken kindly 
to being ignored by Slughorn. 

After dinner they made their way back to Gryffindor 
Tower. The common room was very crowded, as most 
people had finished dinner by now, but they managed 
to find a free table and sat down; Ron, who had been 
in a bad mood ever since the encounter with 
Slughorn, folded his arms and frowned at the ceiling. 
Hermione reached out for a copy of the Evening 
Page | 261 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Prophet, which somebody had left abandoned on a 
chair. 

“Anything new?” said Harry. 

“Not really ...” Hermione had opened the newspaper 
and was scanning the inside pages. “Oh, look, your 
dad’s in here, Ron — he’s all right!” she added 
quickly, for Ron had looked around in alarm. “It just 
says he’s been to visit the Malfoys’ house. ‘This 
second search of the Death Eater’s residence does not 
seem to have yielded any results. Arthur Weasley of 
the Office for the Detection and Confiscation of 
Counterfeit Defensive Spells and Protective Objects 
said that his team had been acting upon a confidential 
tip-off’” 

“Yeah, mine!” said Harry. “I told him at King’s Cross 
about Malfoy and that thing he was trying to get 
Borgin to fix! Well, if it’s not at their house, he must 
have brought whatever it is to Hogwarts with him — ” 

“But how can he have done, Harry?” said Hermione, 
putting down the newspaper with a surprised look. 
“We were all searched when we arrived, weren’t we?” 

“Were you?” said Harry, taken aback. “I wasn’t!” 

“Oh no, of course you weren’t, I forgot you were late. 

... Well, Filch ran over all of us with Secrecy Sensors 
when we got into the entrance hall. Any Dark object 
would have been found, I know for a fact Crabbe had 
a shrunken head confiscated. So you see, Malfoy can’t 
have brought in anything dangerous!” 

Momentarily stymied, Harry watched Ginny Weasley 
playing with Arnold the Pygmy Puff for a while before 
seeing a way around this objection. 



Page | 262 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Someone’s sent it to him by owl, then,” he said. “His 
mother or someone.” 

“All the owls are being checked too,” said Hermione. 
“Filch told us so when he was jabbing those Secrecy 
Sensors everywhere he could reach.” 

Really stumped this time, Harry found nothing else to 
say. There did not seem to be any way Malfoy could 
have brought a dangerous or Dark object into the 
school. He looked hopefully at Ron, who was sitting 
with his arms folded, staring over at Lavender Brown. 

“Can you think of any way Malfoy — ?” 

“Oh, drop it, Harry,” said Ron. 

“Listen, it’s not my fault Slughorn invited Hermione 
and me to his stupid party, neither of us wanted to 
go, you know!” said Harry, firing up. 

“Well, as I’m not invited to any parties,” said Ron, 
getting to his feet again, “I think I’ll go to bed.” 

He stomped off toward the door to the boys’ 
dormitories, leaving Harry and Hermione staring after 
him. 

“Harry?” said the new Chaser, Demelza Robins, 
appearing suddenly at his shoulder. “I’ve got a 
message for you.” 

“From Professor Slughorn?” asked Harry, sitting up 
hopefully. 

“No ... from Professor Snape,” said Demelza. Harry’s 
heart sank. “He says you’re to come to his office at 
half past eight tonight to do your detention — er — no 
matter how many party invitations you’ve received. 

Page | 263 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




And he wanted you to know you’ll be sorting out 
rotten flobberworms from good ones, to use in Potions 
and — and he says there’s no need to bring protective 
gloves.” 

“Right,” said Harry grimly. “Thanks a lot, Demelza.” 



Page | 264 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






SILVER AND OPALS 

Where was Dumbledore, and what was he doing? 
Harry caught sight of the headmaster only twice over 
the next few weeks. He rarely appeared at meals 
anymore, and Harry was sure Hermione was right in 
thinking that he was leaving the school for days at a 
time. Had Dumbledore forgotten the lessons he was 
supposed to be giving Harry? Dumbledore had said 
that the lessons were leading to something to do with 
the prophecy; Harry had felt bolstered, comforted, 
and now he felt slightly abandoned. 

Halfway through October came their first trip of the 
term to Hogsmeade. Harry had wondered whether 
these trips would still be allowed, given the 
increasingly tight security measures around the 
school, but was pleased to know that they were going 
ahead; it was always good to get out of the castle 
grounds for a few hours. 

Harry woke early on the morning of the trip, which 
was proving stormy, and whiled away the time until 



Page | 265 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



breakfast by reading his copy of Advanced Potion- 
Making. He did not usually lie in bed reading his 
textbooks; that sort of behavior, as Ron rightly said, 
was indecent in anybody except Hermione, who was 
simply weird that way. Harry felt, however, that the 
Half-Blood Prince’s copy of Advanced Potion-Making 
hardly qualified as a textbook. The more Harry pored 
over the book, the more he realized how much was in 
there, not only the handy hints and shortcuts on 
potions that were earning him such a glowing 
reputation with Slughorn, but also the imaginative 
little jinxes and hexes scribbled in the margins, which 
Harry was sure, judging by the crossings-out and 
revisions, that the Prince had invented himself. 

Harry had already attempted a few of the Prince’s self- 
invented spells. There had been a hex that caused 
toenails to grow alarmingly fast (he had tried this on 
Crabbe in the corridor, with very entertaining results); 
a jinx that glued the tongue to the roof of the mouth 
(which he had twice used, to general applause, on an 
unsuspecting Argus Filch); and, perhaps most useful 
of all, Muffliato, a spell that filled the ears of anyone 
nearby with an unidentifiable buzzing, so that lengthy 
conversations could be held in class without being 
overheard. The only person who did not find these 
charms amusing was Hermione, who maintained a 
rigidly disapproving expression throughout and 
refused to talk at all if Harry had used the Muffliato 
spell on anyone in the vicinity. 

Sitting up in bed, Harry turned the book sideways so 
as to examine more closely the scribbled instructions 
for a spell that seemed to have caused the Prince 
some trouble. There were many crossings-out and 
alterations, but finally, crammed into a corner of the 
page, the scribble: 

Levicorpus (nvbl) 

Page | 266 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




While the wind and sleet pounded relentlessly on the 
windows, and Neville snored loudly, Harry stared at 
the letters in brackets. Nvbl ... that had to mean 
“nonverbal.” Harry rather doubted he would be able 
to bring off this particular spell; he was still having 
difficulty with nonverbal spells, something Snape had 
been quick to comment on in every D.A.D.A. class. On 
the other hand, the Prince had proved a much more 
effective teacher than Snape so far. 

Pointing his wand at nothing in particular, he gave it 
an upward flick and said Levicorpusl inside his head. 

“ Aaaaaaaargh ! ” 

There was a flash of light and the room was full of 
voices: Everyone had woken up as Ron had let out a 
yell. Harry sent Advanced Potion-Making flying in 
panic; Ron was dangling upside down in midair as 
though an invisible hook had hoisted him up by the 
ankle. 

“Sorry!” yelled Harry, as Dean and Seamus roared 
with laughter, and Neville picked himself up from the 
floor, having fallen out of bed. “Hang on — I’ll let you 
down — ” 

He groped for the potion book and riffled through it in 
a panic, trying to find the right page; at last he 
located it and deciphered one cramped word 
underneath the spell: Praying that this was the 
counter-jinx, Harry thought Liberacorpus\ with all his 
might. 

There was another flash of light, and Ron fell in a 
heap onto his mattress. 

“Sorry,” repeated Harry weakly, while Dean and 
Seamus continued to roar with laughter. 

Page | 267 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Tomorrow,” said Ron in a muffled voice, “I’d rather 
you set the alarm clock.” 

By the time they had got dressed, padding themselves 
out with several of Mrs. Weasley’s hand-knitted 
sweaters and carrying cloaks, scarves, and gloves, 
Ron’s shock had subsided and he had decided that 
Harry’s new spell was highly amusing; so amusing, in 
fact, that he lost no time in regaling Hermione with 
the story as they sat down for breakfast. 

"... and then there was another flash of light and I 
landed on the bed again!” Ron grinned, helping 
himself to sausages. 

Hermione had not cracked a smile during this 
anecdote, and now turned an expression of wintry 
disapproval upon Harry. 

“Was this spell, by any chance, another one from that 
potion book of yours?” she asked. 

Harry frowned at her. 

“Always jump to the worst conclusion, don’t you?” 
“Was it?” 

“Well ... yeah, it was, but so what?” 

“So you just decided to try out an unknown, 
handwritten incantation and see what would 
happen?” 

“Why does it matter if it’s handwritten?” said Harry, 
preferring not to answer the rest of the question. 

“Because it’s probably not Ministry of Magic- 
approved,” said Hermione. “And also,” she added, as 

Page | 268 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry and Ron rolled their eyes, “because I’m starting 
to think this Prince character was a bit dodgy.” 



Both Harry and Ron shouted her down at once. 

“It was a laugh!” said Ron, upending a ketchup bottle 
over his sausages. “Just a laugh, Hermione, that’s 
all!” 

“Dangling people upside down by the ankle?” said 
Hermione. “Who puts their time and energy into 
making up spells like that?” 

“Fred and George,” said Ron, shrugging, “it’s their 
kind of thing. And, er — ” 

“My dad,” said Harry. He had only just remembered. 

“What?” said Ron and Hermione together. 

“My dad used this spell,” said Harry. “I — Lupin told 
me.” 

This last part was not true; in fact, Harry had seen 
his father use the spell on Snape, but he had never 
told Ron and Hermione about that particular 
excursion into the Pensieve. Now, however, a 
wonderful possibility occurred to him. Could the Half- 
Blood Prince possibly be — ? 

“Maybe your dad did use it, Harry,” said Hermione, 
“but he’s not the only one. We’ve seen a whole bunch 
of people use it, in case you’ve forgotten. Dangling 
people in the air. Making them float along, asleep, 
helpless.” 

Harry stared at her. With a sinking feeling, he too 
remembered the behavior of the Death Eaters at the 
Quidditch World Cup. Ron came to his aid. 

Page | 269 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“That was different,” he said robustly. “They were 
abusing it. Harry and his dad were just having a 
laugh. You don’t like the Prince, Hermione,” he added, 
pointing a sausage at her sternly, “because he’s better 
than you at Potions — ” 

“It’s got nothing to do with that!” said Hermione, her 
cheeks reddening. “I just think it’s very irresponsible 
to start performing spells when you don’t even know 
what they’re for, and stop talking about ‘the Prince’ as 
if it’s his title, I bet it’s just a stupid nickname, and it 
doesn’t seem as though he was a very nice person to 
me!” 

“I don’t see where you get that from,” said Harry 
heatedly. “If he’d been a budding Death Eater he 
wouldn’t have been boasting about being ‘half-blood,’ 
would he?” 

Even as he said it, Harry remembered that his father 
had been pure-blood, but he pushed the thought out 
of his mind; he would worry about that later. ... 

“The Death Eaters can’t all be pure-blood, there aren’t 
enough pure-blood wizards left,” said Hermione 
stubbornly. “I expect most of them are half-bloods 
pretending to be pure. It’s only Muggle-borns they 
hate, they’d be quite happy to let you and Ron join 
up.” 

“There is no way they’d let me be a Death Eater!” said 
Ron indignantly, a bit of sausage flying off the fork he 
was now brandishing at Hermione and hitting Ernie 
Macmillan on the head. “My whole family are blood 
traitors! That’s as bad as Muggle-borns to Death 
Eaters!” 



Page | 270 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“And they’d love to have me,” said Harry sarcastically. 
“We’d be best pals if they didn’t keep trying to do me 



in. 






This made Ron laugh; even Hermione gave a grudging 
smile, and a distraction arrived in the shape of Ginny. 

“Hey, Harry, I’m supposed to give you this.” 

It was a scroll of parchment with Harry’s name 
written upon it in familiar thin, slanting writing. 

“Thanks, Ginny ... It’s Dumbledore’s next lesson!” 
Harry told Ron and Hermione, pulling open the 
parchment and quickly reading its contents. “Monday 
evening!” He felt suddenly light and happy. “Want to 
join us in Hogsmeade, Ginny?” he asked. 

“I’m going with Dean — might see you there,” she 
replied, waving at them as she left. 

Filch was standing at the oak front doors as usual, 
checking off the names of people who had permission 
to go into Hogsmeade. The process took even longer 
than normal as Filch was triple-checking everybody 
with his Secrecy Sensor. 

“What does it matter if we’re smuggling Dark stuff 
OUT?” demanded Ron, eyeing the long thin Secrecy 
Sensor with apprehension. “Surely you ought to be 
checking what we bring back IN?” 

His cheek earned him a few extra jabs with the 
Sensor, and he was still wincing as they stepped out 
into the wind and sleet. 

The walk into Hogsmeade was not enjoyable. Harry 
wrapped his scarf over his lower face; the exposed 
part soon felt both raw and numb. The road to the 

Page | 271 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




village was full of students bent double against the 
bitter wind. More than once Harry wondered whether 
they might not have had a better time in the warm 
common room, and when they finally reached 
Hogsmeade and saw that Zonko’s Joke Shop had 
been boarded up, Harry took it as confirmation that 
this trip was not destined to be fun. Ron pointed, with 
a thickly gloved hand, toward Honeydukes, which was 
mercifully open, and Harry and Hermione staggered 
in his wake into the crowded shop. 

“Thank God,” shivered Ron as they were enveloped by 
warm, toffee-scented air. “Let’s stay here all 
afternoon.” 

“Harry, m’boy!” said a booming voice from behind 
them. 

“Oh no,” muttered Harry. The three of them turned to 
see Professor Slughorn, who was wearing an 
enormous furry hat and an overcoat with matching 
fur collar, clutching a large bag of crystalized 
pineapple, and occupying at least a quarter of the 
shop. 

“Harry, that’s three of my little suppers you’ve missed 
now!” said Slughorn, poking him genially in the chest. 
“It won’t do, m’boy, I’m determined to have you! Miss 
Granger loves them, don’t you?” 

“Yes,” said Hermione helplessly, “they’re really — ” 

“So why don’t you come along, Harry?” demanded 
Slughorn. 

“Well, I’ve had Quidditch practice, Professor,” said 
Harry, who had indeed been scheduling practices 
every time Slughorn had sent him a little, violet 
ribbon-adorned invitation. This strategy meant that 

Page | 272 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Ron was not left out, and they usually had a laugh 
with Ginny, imagining Hermione shut up with 
McLaggen and Zabini. 

“Well, I certainly expect you to win your first match 
after all this hard work!” said Slughorn. “But a little 
recreation never hurt anybody. Now, how about 
Monday night, you can’t possibly want to practice in 
this weather. ...” 

“I can’t, Professor, I’ve got — er — an appointment 
with Professor Dumbledore that evening.” 

“Unlucky again!” cried Slughorn dramatically. “Ah, 
well ... you can’t evade me forever, Harry!” 

And with a regal wave, he waddled out of the shop, 
taking as little notice of Ron as though he had been a 
display of Cockroach Clusters. 

“I can’t believe you’ve wriggled out of another one,” 
said Hermione, shaking her head. “They’re not that 
bad, you know. ... They’re even quite fun sometimes. 
...” But then she caught sight of Ron’s expression. 

“Oh, look — they’ve got deluxe sugar quills — those 
would last hours!” 

Glad that Hermione had changed the subject, Harry 
showed much more interest in the new extra-large 
sugar quills than he would normally have done, but 
Ron continued to look moody and merely shrugged 
when Hermione asked him where he wanted to go 
next. 

“Let’s go to the Three Broomsticks,” said Harry. “It’ll 
be warm.” 

They bundled their scarves back over their faces and 
left the sweetshop. The bitter wind was like knives on 

Page | 273 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




their faces after the sugary warmth of Honeydukes. 
The street was not very busy; nobody was lingering to 
chat, just hurrying toward their destinations. The 
exceptions were two men a little ahead of them, 
standing just outside the Three Broomsticks. One was 
very tall and thin; squinting through his rain-washed 
glasses Harry recognized the barman who worked in 
the other Hogsmeade pub, the Hog’s Head. As Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione drew closer, the barman drew his 
cloak more tightly around his neck and walked away, 
leaving the shorter man to fumble with something in 
his arms. They were barely feet from him when Harry 
realized who the man was. 

“Mundungus!” 

The squat, bandy-legged man with long, straggly, 
ginger hair jumped and dropped an ancient suitcase, 
which burst open, releasing what looked like the 
entire contents of a junk shop window. 

“Oh, ’ello, ’Arry,” said Mundungus Fletcher, with a 
most unconvincing stab at airiness. “Well, don’t let 
me keep ya.” 

And he began scrabbling on the ground to retrieve the 
contents of his suitcase with every appearance of a 
man eager to be gone. 

“Are you selling this stuff?” asked Harry, watching 
Mundungus grab an assortment of grubby-looking 
objects from the ground. 

“Oh, well, gotta scrape a living,” said Mundungus. 
“Gimme that!” 

Ron had stooped down and picked up something 
silver. 



Page | 274 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Hang on,” Ron said slowly. “This looks familiar — ” 



“Thank you!” said Mundungus, snatching the goblet 
out of Ron’s hand and stuffing it back into the case. 
“Well, I’ll see you all — OUCH!” 

Harry had pinned Mundungus against the wall of the 
pub by the throat. Holding him fast with one hand, he 
pulled out his wand. 

“Harry!” squealed Hermione. 

“You took that from Sirius’s house,” said Harry, who 
was almost nose to nose with Mundungus and was 
breathing in an unpleasant smell of old tobacco and 
spirits. “That had the Black family crest on it.” 

“I — no — what — ?” spluttered Mundungus, who 
was slowly turning purple. 

“What did you do, go back the night he died and strip 
the place?” snarled Harry. 

“I — no — ” 

“Give it to me!” 

“Harry, you mustn’t!” shrieked Hermione, as 
Mundungus started to turn blue. 

There was a bang, and Harry felt his hands fly off 
Mundungus’s throat. Gasping and spluttering, 
Mundungus seized his fallen case, then — CRACK — 
he Disapparated. 

Harry swore at the top of his voice, spinning on the 
spot to see where Mundungus had gone. 

“COME BACK, YOU THIEVING — !” 

Page | 275 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“There’s no point, Harry.” 



Tonks had appeared out of nowhere, her mousy hair 
wet with sleet. 

“Mundungus will probably be in London by now. 
There’s no point yelling.” 

“He’s nicked Sirius’s stuff! Nicked it!” 

“Yes, but still,” said Tonks, who seemed perfectly 
untroubled by this piece of information. “You should 
get out of the cold.” 

She watched them go through the door of the Three 
Broomsticks. 

The moment he was inside, Harry burst out, “He was 
nicking Sirius’s stuff.” 

“I know, Harry, but please don’t shout, people are 
staring,” whispered Hermione. “Go and sit down, I’ll 
get you a drink.” 

Harry was still fuming when Hermione returned to 
their table a few minutes later holding three bottles of 
butterbeer. 

“Can’t the Order control Mundungus?” Harry 
demanded of the other two in a furious whisper. 

“Can’t they at least stop him stealing everything that’s 
not fixed down when he’s at headquarters?” 

“Shh!” said Hermione desperately, looking around to 
make sure nobody was listening; there were a couple 
of warlocks sitting close by who were staring at Harry 
with great interest, and Zabini was lolling against a 
pillar not far away. “Harry, I’d be annoyed too, I know 
it’s your things he’s stealing — ” 

Page | 276 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry gagged on his butterbeer; he had momentarily 
forgotten that he owned number twelve, Grimmauld 
Place. 

“Yeah, it’s my stuff!” he said. “No wonder he wasn’t 
pleased to see me! Well, I’m going to tell Dumbledore 
what’s going on, he’s the only one who scares 
Mundungus.” 

“Good idea,” whispered Hermione, clearly pleased that 
Harry was calming down. “Ron, what are you staring 
at?” 

“Nothing,” said Ron, hastily looking away from the 
bar, but Harry knew he was trying to catch the eye of 
the curvy and attractive barmaid, Madam Rosmerta, 
for whom he had long nursed a soft spot. 

“I expect ‘nothing’s’ in the back getting more 
firewhisky,” said Hermione waspishly. 

Ron ignored this jibe, sipping his drink in what he 
evidently considered to be a dignified silence. Harry 
was thinking about Sirius, and how he had hated 
those silver goblets anyway. Hermione drummed her 
fingers on the table, her eyes flickering between Ron 
and the bar. The moment Harry drained the last 
drops in his bottle she said, “Shall we call it a day 
and go back to school, then?” 

The other two nodded; it had not been a fun trip and 
the weather was getting worse the longer they stayed. 
Once again they drew their cloaks tightly around 
them, rearranged their scarves, pulled on their gloves, 
then followed Katie Bell and a friend out of the pub 
and back up the High Street. Harry’s thoughts 
strayed to Ginny as they trudged up the road to 
Hogwarts through the frozen slush. They had not met 
up with her, undoubtedly, thought Harry, because 
Page | 277 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




she and Dean were cozily closeted in Madam 
Puddifoot’s Tea Shop, that haunt of happy couples. 
Scowling, he bowed his head against the swirling sleet 
and trudged on. 

It was a little while before Harry became aware that 
the voices of Katie Bell and her friend, which were 
being carried back to him on the wind, had become 
shriller and louder. Harry squinted at their indistinct 
figures. The two girls were having an argument about 
something Katie was holding in her hand. “It’s 
nothing to do with you, Leanne!” Harry heard Katie 
say. 

They rounded a corner in the lane, sleet coming thick 
and fast, blurring Harry’s glasses. Just as he raised a 
gloved hand to wipe them, Leanne made to grab hold 
of the package Katie was holding; Katie tugged it back 
and the package fell to the ground. 

At once, Katie rose into the air, not as Ron had done, 
suspended comically by the ankle, but gracefully, her 
arms outstretched, as though she was about to fly. 

Yet there was something wrong, something eerie. ... 
Her hair was whipped around her by the fierce wind, 
but her eyes were closed and her face was quite 
empty of expression. Harry, Ron, Hermione, and 
Leanne had all halted in their tracks, watching. 

Then, six feet above the ground, Katie let out a 
terrible scream. Her eyes flew open but whatever she 
could see, or whatever she was feeling, was clearly 
causing her terrible anguish. She screamed and 
screamed; Leanne started to scream too and seized 
Katie’s ankles, trying to tug her back to the ground. 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione rushed forward to help, 
but even as they grabbed Katie’s legs, she fell on top 
of them; Harry and Ron managed to catch her but she 
was writhing so much they could hardly hold her. 
Page | 278 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Instead they lowered her to the ground where she 
thrashed and screamed, apparently unable to 
recognize any of them. 

Harry looked around; the landscape seemed deserted. 

“Stay there!” he shouted at the others over the 
howling wind. “I’m going for help!” 

He began to sprint toward the school; he had never 
seen anyone behave as Katie had just behaved and 
could not think what had caused it; he hurtled 
around a bend in the lane and collided with what 
seemed to be an enormous bear on its hind legs. 

“Hagrid!” he panted, disentangling himself from the 
hedgerow into which he had fallen. 

“Harry!” said Hagrid, who had sleet trapped in his 
eyebrows and beard, and was wearing his great, 
shaggy beaverskin coat. “Jus’ bin visitin’ Grawp, he’s 
cornin’ on so well yeh wouldn’ — ” 

“Hagrid, someone’s hurt back there, or cursed, or 
something — ” 

“Wha?” said Hagrid, bending lower to hear what 
Harry was saying over the raging wind. 

“Someone’s been cursed!” bellowed Harry. 

“Cursed? Who’s bin cursed — not Ron? Hermione?” 

“No, it’s not them, it’s Katie Bell — this way ...” 

Together they ran back along the lane. It took them 
no time to find the little group of people around Katie, 
who was still writhing and screaming on the ground; 



Page | 279 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Ron, Hermione, and Leanne were all trying to quiet 
her. 

“Get back!” shouted Hagrid. “Lemme see her!” 

“Something’s happened to her!” sobbed Leanne. “I 
don’t know what — ” 

Hagrid stared at Katie for a second, then without a 
word, bent down, scooped her into his arms, and ran 
off toward the castle with her. Within seconds, Katie’s 
piercing screams had died away and the only sound 
was the roar of the wind. 

Hermione hurried over to Katie’s wailing friend and 
put an arm around her. 

“It’s Leanne, isn’t it?” 

The girl nodded. 

“Did it just happen all of a sudden, or — ?” 

“It was when that package tore,” sobbed Leanne, 
pointing at the now sodden brown-paper package on 
the ground, which had split open to reveal a greenish 
glitter. Ron bent down, his hand outstretched, but 
Harry seized his arm and pulled him back. 

“Don’t touch if!” 

He crouched down. An ornate opal necklace was 
visible, poking out of the paper. 

“I’ve seen that before,” said Harry, staring at the 
thing. “It was on display in Borgin and Burkes ages 
ago. The label said it was cursed. Katie must have 
touched it.” He looked up at Leanne, who had started 



Page | 280 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




to shake uncontrollably. “How did Katie get hold of 
this?” 



“Well, that’s why we were arguing. She came back 
from the bathroom in the Three Broomsticks holding 
it, said it was a surprise for somebody at Hogwarts 
and she had to deliver it. She looked all funny when 
she said it. ... Oh no, oh no, I bet she’d been 
Imperiused and I didn’t realize!” 

Leanne shook with renewed sobs. Hermione patted 
her shoulder gently. 

“She didn’t say who’d given it to her, Leanne?” 

“No ... she wouldn’t tell me ... and I said she was 
being stupid and not to take it up to school, but she 
just wouldn’t listen and ... and then I tried to grab it 
from her . . . and — and — ” 

Leanne let out a wail of despair. 

“We’d better get up to school,” said Hermione, her 
arm still around Leanne. “We’ll be able to find out 
how she is. Come on. ...” 

Harry hesitated for a moment, then pulled his scarf 
from around his face and, ignoring Ron’s gasp, 
carefully covered the necklace in it and picked it up. 

“Well need to show this to Madam Pomfrey,” he said. 

As they followed Hermione and Leanne up the road, 
Harry was thinking furiously. They had just entered 
the grounds when he spoke, unable to keep his 
thoughts to himself any longer. 

“Malfoy knows about this necklace. It was in a case at 
Borgin and Burkes four years ago, I saw him having a 

Page | 281 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




good look at it while I was hiding from him and his 
dad. This is what he was buying that day when we 
followed him! He remembered it and he went back for 
it!” 



“I — I dunno, Harry,” said Ron hesitantly. “Loads of 
people go to Borgin and Burkes ... and didn’t that girl 
say Katie got it in the girls’ bathroom?” 

“She said she came back from the bathroom with it, 
she didn’t necessarily get it in the bathroom itself — ” 

“McGonagall!” said Ron warningly. 

Harry looked up. Sure enough, Professor McGonagall 
was hurrying down the stone steps through swirling 
sleet to meet them. 

“Hagrid says you four saw what happened to Katie 
Bell — upstairs to my office at once, please! What’s 
that you’re holding, Potter?” 

“It’s the thing she touched,” said Harry. 

“Good lord,” said Professor McGonagall, looking 
alarmed as she took the necklace from Harry. “No, no, 
Filch, they’re with me!” she added hastily, as Filch 
came shuffling eagerly across the entrance hall 
holding his Secrecy Sensor aloft. “Take this necklace 
to Professor Snape at once, but be sure not to touch 
it, keep it wrapped in the scarf!” 

Harry and the others followed Professor McGonagall 
upstairs and into her office. The sleet-spattered 
windows were rattling in their frames, and the room 
was chilly despite the fire crackling in the grate. 
Professor McGonagall closed the door and swept 
around her desk to face Harry, Ron, Hermione, and 
the still sobbing Leanne. 

Page | 282 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Well?” she said sharply. “What happened?” 



Haltingly, and with many pauses while she attempted 
to control her crying, Leanne told Professor 
McGonagall how Katie had gone to the bathroom in 
the Three Broomsticks and returned holding the 
unmarked package, how Katie had seemed a little 
odd, and how they had argued about the advisability 
of agreeing to deliver unknown objects, the argument 
culminating in the tussle over the parcel, which tore 
open. At this point, Leanne was so overcome, there 
was no getting another word out of her. 

“All right,” said Professor McGonagall, not unkindly, 
“go up to the hospital wing, please, Leanne, and get 
Madam Pomfrey to give you something for shock.” 

When she had left the room, Professor McGonagall 
turned back to Harry, Ron, and Hermione. 

“What happened when Katie touched the necklace?” 

“She rose up in the air,” said Harry, before either Ron 
or Hermione could speak, “and then began to scream, 
and collapsed. Professor, can I see Professor 
Dumbledore, please?” 

“The headmaster is away until Monday, Potter,” said 
Professor McGonagall, looking surprised. 

“Away?” Harry repeated angrily. 

“Yes, Potter, away!” said Professor McGonagall tartly. 
“But anything you have to say about this horrible 
business can be said to me, I’m sure!” 

For a split second, Harry hesitated. Professor 
McGonagall did not invite confidences; Dumbledore, 
though in many ways more intimidating, still seemed 

Page | 283 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




less likely to scorn a theory, however wild. This was a 
life-and-death matter, though, and no moment to 
worry about being laughed at. 

“I think Draco Malfoy gave Katie that necklace, 
Professor.” 

On one side of him, Ron rubbed his nose in apparent 
embarrassment; on the other, Hermione shuffled her 
feet as though quite keen to put a bit of distance 
between herself and Harry. 

“That is a very serious accusation, Potter,” said 
Professor McGonagall, after a shocked pause. “Do you 
have any proof?” 

“No,” said Harry, “but ...” and he told her about 
following Malfoy to Borgin and Burkes and the 
conversation they had overheard between him and 
Mr. Borgin. 

When he had finished speaking, Professor 
McGonagall looked slightly confused. 

“Malfoy took something to Borgin and Burkes for 
repair?” 

“No, Professor, he just wanted Borgin to tell him how 
to mend something, he didn’t have it with him. But 
that’s not the point, the thing is that he bought 
something at the same time, and I think it was that 
necklace — ” 

“You saw Malfoy leaving the shop with a similar 
package?” 

“No, Professor, he told Borgin to keep it in the shop 
for him — ” 



Page | 284 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“But Harry,” Hermione interrupted, “Borgin asked 
him if he wanted to take it with him, and Malfoy said 



no — 






“Because he didn’t want to touch it, obviously!” said 
Harry angrily. 

“What he actually said was, ‘How would I look 
carrying that down the street?’ ” said Hermione. 

“Well, he would look a bit of a prat carrying a 
necklace,” interjected Ron. 

“Oh, Ron,” said Hermione despairingly, “it would be 
all wrapped up, so he wouldn’t have to touch it, and 
quite easy to hide inside a cloak, so nobody would see 
it! I think whatever he reserved at Borgin and Burkes 
was noisy or bulky, something he knew would draw 
attention to him if he carried it down the street — and 
in any case,” she pressed on loudly, before Harry 
could interrupt, “I asked Borgin about the necklace, 
don’t you remember? When I went in to try and find 
out what Malfoy had asked him to keep, I saw it 
there. And Borgin just told me the price, he didn’t say 
it was already sold or anything — ” 

“Well, you were being really obvious, he realized what 
you were up to within about five seconds, of course 
he wasn’t going to tell you — anyway, Malfoy could’ve 
sent off for it since — ” 

“That’s enough!” said Professor McGonagall, as 
Hermione opened her mouth to retort, looking 
furious. “Potter, I appreciate you telling me this, but 
we cannot point the finger of blame at Mr. Malfoy 
purely because he visited the shop where this 
necklace might have been purchased. The same is 
probably true of hundreds of people — ” 



Page | 285 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“ — that’s what I said — ” muttered Ron. 



“ — and in any case, we have put stringent security 
measures in place this year. I do not believe that 
necklace can possibly have entered this school 
without our knowledge — ” 

“But — ” 

“ — and what is more,” said Professor McGonagall, 
with an air of awful finality, “Mr. Malfoy was not in 
Hogsmeade today.” 

Harry gaped at her, deflating. 

“How do you know, Professor?” 

“Because he was doing detention with me. He has 
now failed to complete his Transfiguration homework 
twice in a row. So, thank you for telling me your 
suspicions, Potter,” she said as she marched past 
them, “but I need to go up to the hospital wing now to 
check on Katie Bell. Good day to you all.” 

She held open her office door. They had no choice but 
to file past her without another word. 

Harry was angry with the other two for siding with 
McGonagall; nevertheless, he felt compelled to join in 
once they started discussing what had happened. 

“So who do you reckon Katie was supposed to give the 
necklace to?” asked Ron, as they climbed the stairs to 
the common room. 

“Goodness only knows,” said Hermione. “But whoever 
it was has had a narrow escape. No one could have 
opened that package without touching the necklace.” 



Page | 286 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“It could’ve been meant for loads of people,” said 
Harry. “Dumbledore — the Death Eaters would love to 
get rid of him, he must be one of their top targets. Or 
Slughorn — Dumbledore reckons Voldemort really 
wanted him and they can’t be pleased that he’s sided 
with Dumbledore. Or — ” 

“Or you,” said Hermione, looking troubled. 

“Couldn’t have been,” said Harry, “or Katie would’ve 
just turned around in the lane and given it to me, 
wouldn’t she? I was behind her all the way out of the 
Three Broomsticks. It would have made much more 
sense to deliver the parcel outside Hogwarts, what 
with Filch searching everyone who goes in and out. I 
wonder why Malfoy told her to take it into the castle?” 

“Harry, Malfoy wasn’t in Hogsmeade!” said Hermione, 
actually stamping her foot in frustration. 

“He must have used an accomplice, then,” said Harry. 
“Crabbe or Goyle — or, come to think of it, another 
Death Eater, he’ll have loads better cronies than 
Crabbe and Goyle now he’s joined up — ” 

Ron and Hermione exchanged looks that plainly said 
There’s no point arguing with him. 

“Dilligrout,” said Hermione firmly as they reached the 
Fat Lady. 

The portrait swung open to admit them to the 
common room. It was quite full and smelled of damp 
clothing; many people seemed to have returned from 
Hogsmeade early because of the bad weather. There 
was no buzz of fear or speculation, however: Clearly, 
the news of Katie’s fate had not yet spread. 



Page | 287 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“It wasn’t a very slick attack, really, when you stop 
and think about it,” said Ron, casually turfing a first 
year out of one of the good armchairs by the fire so 
that he could sit down. “The curse didn’t even make it 
into the castle. Not what you’d call foolproof.” 

“You’re right,” said Hermione, prodding Ron out of the 
chair with her foot and offering it to the first year 
again. “It wasn’t very well thought-out at all.” 

“But since when has Malfoy been one of the world’s 
great thinkers?” asked Harry. 

Neither Ron nor Hermione answered him. 



Page | 288 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






THE SECRET RIDDLE 

Katie was removed to St. Mungo’s Hospital for 
Magical Maladies and Injuries the following day, by 
which time the news that she had been cursed had 
spread all over the school, though the details were 
confused and nobody other than Harry, Ron, 
Hermione, and Leanne seemed to know that Katie 
herself had not been the intended target. 

“Oh, and Malfoy knows, of course,” said Harry to Ron 
and Hermione, who continued their new policy of 
feigning deafness whenever Harry mentioned his 
Malfoy-Is-a-Death-Eater theory. 

Harry had wondered whether Dumbledore would 
return from wherever he had been in time for Monday 
night’s lesson, but having had no word to the 
contrary, he presented himself outside Dumbledore ’s 
office at eight o’clock, knocked, and was told to enter. 
There sat Dumbledore looking unusually tired; his 
hand was as black and burned as ever, but he smiled 
when he gestured to Harry to sit down. The Pensieve 



Page | 289 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



was sitting on the desk again, casting silvery specks 
of light over the ceiling. 



“You have had a busy time while I have been away,” 
Dumbledore said. “I believe you witnessed Katie’s 
accident.” 

“Yes, sir. How is she?” 

“Still very unwell, although she was relatively lucky. 
She appears to have brushed the necklace with the 
smallest possible amount of skin: There was a tiny 
hole in her glove. Had she put it on, had she even 
held it in her ungloved hand, she would have died, 
perhaps instantly. Luckily Professor Snape was able 
to do enough to prevent a rapid spread of the curse — 



“Why him?” asked Harry quickly. “Why not Madam 
Pomfrey?” 

“Impertinent,” said a soft voice from one of the 
portraits on the wall, and Phineas Nigellus Black, 
Sirius’s great-great-grandfather, raised his head from 
his arms where he had appeared to be sleeping. “I 
would not have permitted a student to question the 
way Hogwarts operated in my day.” 

“Yes, thank you, Phineas,” said Dumbledore 
quellingly. “Professor Snape knows much more about 
the Dark Arts than Madam Pomfrey, Harry. Anyway, 
the St. Mungo’s staff are sending me hourly reports, 
and I am hopeful that Katie will make a full recovery 
in time.” 

“Where were you this weekend, sir?” Harry asked, 
disregarding a strong feeling that he might be 
pushing his luck, a feeling apparently shared by 
Phineas Nigellus, who hissed softly. 

Page | 290 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I would rather not say just now,” said Dumbledore. 
“However, I shall tell you in due course.” 

“You will?” said Harry, startled. 

“Yes, I expect so,” said Dumbledore, withdrawing a 
fresh bottle of silver memories from inside his robes 
and uncorking it with a prod of his wand. 

“Sir,” said Harry tentatively, “I met Mundungus in 
Hogsmeade.” 

“Ah yes, I am already aware that Mundungus has 
been treating your inheritance with light-fingered 
contempt,” said Dumbledore, frowning a little. “He 
has gone to ground since you accosted him outside 
the Three Broomsticks; I rather think he dreads 
facing me. However, rest assured that he will not be 
making away with any more of Sirius’s old 
possessions.” 

“That mangy old half-blood has been stealing Black 
heirlooms?” said Phineas Nigellus, incensed; and he 
stalked out of his frame, undoubtedly to visit his 
portrait in number twelve, Grimmauld Place. 

“Professor,” said Harry, after a short pause, “did 
Professor McGonagall tell you what I told her after 
Katie got hurt? About Draco Malfoy?” 

“She told me of your suspicions, yes,” said 
Dumbledore. 

“And do you — ?” 

“I shall take all appropriate measures to investigate 
anyone who might have had a hand in Katie’s 
accident,” said Dumbledore. “But what concerns me 
now, Harry, is our lesson.” 

Page | 291 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry felt slightly resentful at this: If their lessons 
were so very important, why had there been such a 
long gap between the first and second? However, he 
said no more about Draco Malfoy, but watched as 
Dumbledore poured the fresh memories into the 
Pensieve and began swirling the stone basin once 
more between his long-fingered hands. 

“You will remember, I am sure, that we left the tale of 
Lord Voldemort’s beginnings at the point where the 
handsome Muggle, Tom Riddle, had abandoned his 
witch wife, Merope, and returned to his family home 
in Little Hangleton. Merope was left alone in London, 
expecting the baby who would one day become Lord 
Voldemort.” 

“How do you know she was in London, sir?” 

“Because of the evidence of one Caractacus Burke,” 
said Dumbledore, “who, by an odd coincidence, 
helped found the very shop whence came the 
necklace we have just been discussing.” 

He swilled the contents of the Pensieve as Harry had 
seen him swill them before, much as a gold 
prospector sifts for gold. Up out of the swirling, silvery 
mass rose a little old man revolving slowly in the 
Pensieve, silver as a ghost but much more solid, with 
a thatch of hair that completely covered his eyes. 

“Yes, we acquired it in curious circumstances. It was 
brought in by a young witch just before Christmas, 
oh, many years ago now. She said she needed the 
gold badly, well, that much was obvious. Covered in 
rags and pretty far along ... Going to have a baby, see. 
She said the locket had been Slytherin’s. Well, we 
hear that sort of story all the time, ‘Oh, this was 
Merlin’s, this was, his favorite teapot,’ but when I 
looked at it, it had his mark all right, and a few 
Page | 292 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




simple spells were enough to tell me the truth. Of 
course, that made it near enough priceless. She didn’t 
seem to have any idea how much it was worth. Happy 
to get ten Galleons for it. Best bargain we ever made!” 

Dumbledore gave the Pensieve an extra-vigorous 
shake and Caractacus Burke descended back into the 
swirling mass of memory from whence he had come. 

“He only gave her ten Galleons?” said Harry 
indignantly. 

“Caractacus Burke was not famed for his generosity,” 
said Dumbledore. “So we know that, near the end of 
her pregnancy, Merope was alone in London and in 
desperate need of gold, desperate enough to sell her 
one and only valuable possession, the locket that was 
one of Marvolo’s treasured family heirlooms.” 

“But she could do magic!” said Harry impatiently. 

“She could have got food and everything for herself by 
magic, couldn’t she?” 

“Ah,” said Dumbledore, “perhaps she could. But it is 
my belief — I am guessing again, but I am sure I am 
right — that when her husband abandoned her, 
Merope stopped using magic. I do not think that she 
wanted to be a witch any longer. Of course, it is also 
possible that her unrequited love and the attendant 
despair sapped her of her powers; that can happen. 

In any case, as you are about to see, Merope refused 
to raise her wand even to save her own life.” 

“She wouldn’t even stay alive for her son?” 

Dumbledore raised his eyebrows. “Could you possibly 
be feeling sorry for Lord Voldemort?” 



Page | 293 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No,” said Harry quickly, “but she had a choice, didn’t 
she, not like my mother — ” 

“Your mother had a choice too,” said Dumbledore 
gently. “Yes, Merope Riddle chose death in spite of a 
son who needed her, but do not judge her too 
harshly, Harry. She was greatly weakened by long 
suffering and she never had your mother’s courage. 
And now, if you will stand ...” 

“Where are we going?” Harry asked, as Dumbledore 
joined him at the front of the desk. 

“This time,” said Dumbledore, “we are going to enter 
my memory. I think you will find it both rich in detail 
and satisfyingly accurate. After you, Harry ...” 

Harry bent over the Pensieve; his face broke the cool 
surface of the memory and then he was falling 
through darkness again. ... Seconds later, his feet hit 
firm ground; he opened his eyes and found that he 
and Dumbledore were standing in a bustling, old- 
fashioned London street. 

“There I am,” said Dumbledore brightly, pointing 
ahead of them to a tall figure crossing the road in 
front of a horse-drawn milk cart. 

This younger Albus Dumbledore ’s long hair and beard 
were auburn. Having reached their side of the street, 
he strode off along the pavement, drawing many 
curious glances due to the flamboyantly cut suit of 
plum velvet that he was wearing. 

“Nice suit, sir,” said Harry, before he could stop 
himself, but Dumbledore merely chuckled as they 
followed his younger self a short distance, finally 
passing through a set of iron gates into a bare 
courtyard that fronted a rather grim, square building 
Page | 294 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




surrounded by high railings. He mounted the few 
steps leading to the front door and knocked once. 
After a moment or two, the door was opened by a 
scruffy girl wearing an apron. 

“Good afternoon. I have an appointment with a Mrs. 
Cole, who, I believe, is the matron here?” 

“Oh,” said the bewildered-looking girl, taking in 
Dumbledore ’s eccentric appearance. “Um ... just a 
mo’ ... MRS. COLE!” she bellowed over her shoulder. 

Harry heard a distant voice shouting something in 
response. The girl turned back to Dumbledore. “Come 
in, she’s on ’er way.” 

Dumbledore stepped into a hallway tiled in black and 
white; the whole place was shabby but spotlessly 
clean. Harry and the older Dumbledore followed. 
Before the front door had closed behind them, a 
skinny, harassed-looking woman came scurrying 
toward them. She had a sharp-featured face that 
appeared more anxious than unkind, and she was 
talking over her shoulder to another aproned helper 
as she walked toward Dumbledore. 

"... and take the iodine upstairs to Martha, Billy 
Stubbs has been picking his scabs and Eric Whalley’s 
oozing all over his sheets — chicken pox on top of 
everything else,” she said to nobody in particular, and 
then her eyes fell upon Dumbledore and she stopped 
dead in her tracks, looking as astonished as if a 
giraffe had just crossed her threshold. 

“Good afternoon,” said Dumbledore, holding out his 
hand. 

Mrs. Cole simply gaped. 



Page | 295 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“My name is Albus Dumbledore. I sent you a letter 
requesting an appointment and you very kindly 
invited me here today.” 

Mrs. Cole blinked. Apparently deciding that 
Dumbledore was not a hallucination, she said feebly, 
“Oh yes. Well — well then — you’d better come into 
my room. Yes.” 

She led Dumbledore into a small room that seemed 
part sitting room, part office. It was as shabby as the 
hallway and the furniture was old and mismatched. 
She invited Dumbledore to sit on a rickety chair and 
seated herself behind a cluttered desk, eyeing him 
nervously. 

“I am here, as I told you in my letter, to discuss Tom 
Riddle and arrangements for his future,” said 
Dumbledore. 

“Are you family?” asked Mrs. Cole. 

“No, I am a teacher,” said Dumbledore. “I have come 
to offer Tom a place at my school.” 

“What school’s this, then?” 

“It is called Hogwarts,” said Dumbledore. 

“And how come you’re interested in Tom?” 

“We believe he has qualities we are looking for.” 

“You mean he’s won a scholarship? How can he have 
done? He’s never been entered for one.” 

“Well, his name has been down for our school since 
birth — ” 



Page | 296 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Who registered him? His parents?” 



There was no doubt that Mrs. Cole was an 
inconveniently sharp woman. Apparently Dumbledore 
thought so too, for Harry now saw him slip his wand 
out of the pocket of his velvet suit, at the same time 
picking up a piece of perfectly blank paper from Mrs. 
Cole’s desktop. 

“Here,” said Dumbledore, waving his wand once as he 
passed her the piece of paper, “I think this will make 
everything clear.” 

Mrs. Cole’s eyes slid out of focus and back again as 
she gazed intently at the blank paper for a moment. 

“That seems perfectly in order,” she said placidly, 
handing it back. Then her eyes fell upon a bottle of 
gin and two glasses that had certainly not been 
present a few seconds before. 

“Er — may I offer you a glass of gin?” she said in an 
extra-refined voice. 

“Thank you very much,” said Dumbledore, beaming. 

It soon became clear that Mrs. Cole was no novice 
when it came to gin drinking. Pouring both of them a 
generous measure, she drained her own glass in one 
gulp. Smacking her lips frankly, she smiled at 
Dumbledore for the first time, and he didn’t hesitate 
to press his advantage. 

“I was wondering whether you could tell me anything 
of Tom Riddle’s history? I think he was born here in 
the orphanage?” 

“That’s right,” said Mrs. Cole, helping herself to more 
gin. “I remember it clear as anything, because I’d just 

Page | 297 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




started here myself. New Year’s Eve and bitter cold, 
snowing, you know. Nasty night. And this girl, not 
much older than I was myself at the time, came 
staggering up the front steps. Well, she wasn’t the 
first. We took her in, and she had the baby within the 
hour. And she was dead in another hour.” 

Mrs. Cole nodded impressively and took another 
generous gulp of gin. 

“Did she say anything before she died?” asked 
Dumbledore. “Anything about the boy’s father, for 
instance?” 

“Now, as it happens, she did,” said Mrs. Cole, who 
seemed to be rather enjoying herself now, with the gin 
in her hand and an eager audience for her story. “I 
remember she said to me, ‘I hope he looks like his 
papa,’ and I won’t lie, she was right to hope it, 
because she was no beauty — and then she told me 
he was to be named Tom, for his father, and Marvolo, 
for her father — yes, I know, funny name, isn’t it? We 
wondered whether she came from a circus — and she 
said the boy’s surname was to be Riddle. And she 
died soon after that without another word. 

“Well, we named him just as she’d said, it seemed so 
important to the poor girl, but no Tom nor Marvolo 
nor any kind of Riddle ever came looking for him, nor 
any family at all, so he stayed in the orphanage and 
he’s been here ever since.” 

Mrs. Cole helped herself, almost absentmindedly, to 
another healthy measure of gin. Two pink spots had 
appeared high on her cheekbones. Then she said, 
“He’s a funny boy.” 

“Yes,” said Dumbledore. “I thought he might be.” 



Page | 298 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“He was a funny baby too. He hardly ever cried, you 
know. And then, when he got a little older, he was . . . 
odd.” 



“Odd in what way?” asked Dumbledore gently. 

“Well, he — ” 

But Mrs. Cole pulled up short, and there was nothing 
blurry or vague about the inquisitorial glance she 
shot Dumbledore over her gin glass. 

“He’s definitely got a place at your school, you say?” 

“Definitely,” said Dumbledore. 

“And nothing I say can change that?” 

“Nothing,” said Dumbledore. 

“You’ll be taking him away, whatever?” 

“Whatever,” repeated Dumbledore gravely. 

She squinted at him as though deciding whether or 
not to trust him. Apparently she decided she could, 
because she said in a sudden rush, “He scares the 
other children.” 

“You mean he is a bully?” asked Dumbledore. 

“I think he must be,” said Mrs. Cole, frowning 
slightly, “but it’s very hard to catch him at it. There 
have been incidents. ... Nasty things ...” 

Dumbledore did not press her, though Harry could 
tell that he was interested. She took yet another gulp 
of gin and her rosy cheeks grew rosier still. 

Page | 299 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Billy Stubbs’s rabbit ... well, Tom said he didn’t do it 
and I don’t see how he could have done, but even so, 
it didn’t hang itself from the rafters, did it?” 

“I shouldn’t think so, no,” said Dumbledore quietly. 

“But I’m jiggered if I know how he got up there to do 
it. All I know is he and Billy had argued the day 
before. And then” — Mrs. Cole took another swig of 
gin, slopping a little over her chin this time — “on the 
summer outing — we take them out, you know, once 
a year, to the countryside or to the seaside — well, 
Amy Benson and Dennis Bishop were never quite 
right afterwards, and all we ever got out of them was 
that they’d gone into a cave with Tom Riddle. He 
swore they’d just gone exploring, but something 
happened in there, I’m sure of it. And, well, there 
have been a lot of things, funny things. ...” 

She looked around at Dumbledore again, and though 
her cheeks were flushed, her gaze was steady. “I don’t 
think many people will be sorry to see the back of 
him.” 

“You understand, I’m sure, that we will not be 
keeping him permanently?” said Dumbledore. “He will 
have to return here, at the very least, every summer.” 

“Oh, well, that’s better than a whack on the nose with 
a rusty poker,” said Mrs. Cole with a slight hiccup. 

She got to her feet, and Harry was impressed to see 
that she was quite steady, even though two-thirds of 
the gin was now gone. “I suppose you’d like to see 
him?” 

“Very much,” said Dumbledore, rising too. 

She led him out of her office and up the stone stairs, 
calling out instructions and admonitions to helpers 

Page | 300 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




and children as she passed. The orphans, Harry saw, 
were all wearing the same kind of grayish tunic. They 
looked reasonably well-cared for, but there was no 
denying that this was a grim place in which to grow 
up. 

“Here we are,” said Mrs. Cole, as they turned off the 
second landing and stopped outside the first door in a 
long corridor. She knocked twice and entered. 

“Tom? You’ve got a visitor. This is Mr. Dumberton — 
sorry, Dunderbore. He’s come to tell you — well, I’ll 
let him do it.” 

Harry and the two Dumbledores entered the room, 
and Mrs. Cole closed the door on them. It was a small 
bare room with nothing in it except an old wardrobe, 
a wooden chair, and an iron bedstead. A boy was 
sitting on top of the gray blankets, his legs stretched 
out in front of him, holding a book. 

There was no trace of the Gaunts in Tom Riddle’s 
face. Merope had got her dying wish: He was his 
handsome father in miniature, tall for eleven years 
old, dark-haired, and pale. His eyes narrowed slightly 
as he took in Dumbledore’s eccentric appearance. 
There was a moment’s silence. 

“How do you do, Tom?” said Dumbledore, walking 
forward and holding out his hand. 

The boy hesitated, then took it, and they shook 
hands. Dumbledore drew up the hard wooden chair 
beside Riddle, so that the pair of them looked rather 
like a hospital patient and visitor. 

“I am Professor Dumbledore.” 



Page | 301 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“ ‘Professor?” repeated Riddle. He looked wary. “Is 
that like ‘doctor? What are you here for? Did she get 
you in to have a look at me?” 

He was pointing at the door through which Mrs. Cole 
had just left. 

“No, no,” said Dumbledore, smiling. 

“I don’t believe you,” said Riddle. “She wants me 
looked at, doesn’t she? Tell the truth!” 

He spoke the last three words with a ringing force 
that was almost shocking. It was a command, and it 
sounded as though he had given it many times 
before. His eyes had widened and he was glaring at 
Dumbledore, who made no response except to 
continue smiling pleasantly. After a few seconds 
Riddle stopped glaring, though he looked, if anything, 
warier still. 

“Who are you?” 

“I have told you. My name is Professor Dumbledore 
and I work at a school called Hogwarts. I have come 
to offer you a place at my school — your new school, 
if you would like to come.” 

Riddle’s reaction to this was most surprising. He leapt 
from the bed and backed away from Dumbledore, 
looking furious. 

“You can’t kid me! The asylum, that’s where you’re 
from, isn’t it? ‘Professor,’ yes, of course — well, I’m 
not going, see? That old cat’s the one who should be 
in the asylum. I never did anything to little Amy 
Benson or Dennis Bishop, and you can ask them, 
they’ll tell you!” 



Page | 302 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I am not from the asylum,” said Dumbledore 
patiently. “I am a teacher and, if you will sit down 
calmly, I shall tell you about Hogwarts. Of course, if 
you would rather not come to the school, nobody will 
force you — ” 

“I’d like to see them try,” sneered Riddle. 

“Hogwarts,” Dumbledore went on, as though he had 
not heard Riddle’s last words, “is a school for people 
with special abilities — ” 

“I’m not mad!” 

“I know that you are not mad. Hogwarts is not a 
school for mad people. It is a school of magic.” 

There was silence. Riddle had frozen, his face 
expressionless, but his eyes were flickering back and 
forth between each of Dumbledore’s, as though trying 
to catch one of them lying. 

“Magic?” he repeated in a whisper. 

“That’s right,” said Dumbledore. 

“It’s ... it’s magic, what I can do?” 

“What is it that you can do?” 

“All sorts,” breathed Riddle. A flush of excitement was 
rising up his neck into his hollow cheeks; he looked 
fevered. “I can make things move without touching 
them. I can make animals do what I want them to do, 
without training them. I can make bad things happen 
to people who annoy me. I can make them hurt if I 
want to.” 



Page | 303 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




His legs were trembling. He stumbled forward and sat 
down on the bed again, staring at his hands, his head 
bowed as though in prayer. 

“I knew I was different,” he whispered to his own 
quivering fingers. “I knew I was special. Always, I 
knew there was something.” 

“Well, you were quite right,” said Dumbledore, who 
was no longer smiling, but watching Riddle intently. 
“You are a wizard.” 

Riddle lifted his head. His face was transfigured: 

There was a wild happiness upon it, yet for some 
reason it did not make him better looking; on the 
contrary, his finely carved features seemed somehow 
rougher, his expression almost bestial. 

“Are you a wizard too?” 

“Yes, I am.” 

“Prove it,” said Riddle at once, in the same 
commanding tone he had used when he had said, 

“Tell the truth.” 

Dumbledore raised his eyebrows. “If, as I take it, you 
are accepting your place at Hogwarts — ” 

“Of course I am!” 

“Then you will address me as ‘Professor’ or ‘sir.’ ” 

Riddle’s expression hardened for the most fleeting 
moment before he said, in an unrecognizably polite 
voice, “I’m sorry, sir. I meant — please, Professor, 
could you show me — ?” 



Page | 304 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry was sure that Dumbledore was going to refuse, 
that he would tell Riddle there would be plenty of time 
for practical demonstrations at Hogwarts, that they 
were currently in a building full of Muggles and must 
therefore be cautious. To his great surprise, however, 
Dumbledore drew his wand from an inside pocket of 
his suit jacket, pointed it at the shabby wardrobe in 
the corner, and gave the wand a casual flick. 

The wardrobe burst into flames. 

Riddle jumped to his feet; Harry could hardly blame 
him for howling in shock and rage; all his worldly 
possessions must be in there. But even as Riddle 
rounded on Dumbledore, the flames vanished, leaving 
the wardrobe completely undamaged. 

Riddle stared from the wardrobe to Dumbledore; then, 
his expression greedy, he pointed at the wand. 

“Where can I get one of them?” 

“All in good time,” said Dumbledore. “I think there is 
something trying to get out of your wardrobe.” 

And sure enough, a faint rattling could be heard from 
inside it. For the first time, Riddle looked frightened. 

“Open the door,” said Dumbledore. 

Riddle hesitated, then crossed the room and threw 
open the wardrobe door. On the topmost shelf, above 
a rail of threadbare clothes, a small cardboard box 
was shaking and rattling as though there were several 
frantic mice trapped inside it. 

“Take it out,” said Dumbledore. 

Riddle took down the quaking box. He looked 
unnerved. 

Page | 305 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Is there anything in that box that you ought not to 
have?” asked Dumbledore. 

Riddle threw Dumbledore a long, clear, calculating 
look. “Yes, I suppose so, sir,” he said finally, in an 
expressionless voice. 

“Open it,” said Dumbledore. 

Riddle took off the lid and tipped the contents onto 
his bed without looking at them. Harry, who had 
expected something much more exciting, saw a mess 
of small, everyday objects: a yo-yo, a silver thimble, 
and a tarnished mouth organ among them. Once free 
of the box, they stopped quivering and lay quite still 
upon the thin blankets. 

“You will return them to their owners with your 
apologies,” said Dumbledore calmly, putting his wand 
back into his jacket. “I shall know whether it has 
been done. And be warned: Thieving is not tolerated 
at Hogwarts.” 

Riddle did not look remotely abashed; he was still 
staring coldly and appraisingly at Dumbledore. At last 
he said in a colorless voice, “Yes, sir.” 

“At Hogwarts,” Dumbledore went on, “we teach you 
not only to use magic, but to control it. You have — 
inadvertently, I am sure — been using your powers in 
a way that is neither taught nor tolerated at our 
school. You are not the first, nor will you be the last, 
to allow your magic to run away with you. But you 
should know that Hogwarts can expel students, and 
the Ministry of Magic — yes, there is a Ministry — will 
punish lawbreakers still more severely. All new 
wizards must accept that, in entering our world, they 
abide by our laws.” 



Page | 306 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes, sir,” said Riddle again. 



It was impossible to tell what he was thinking; his 
face remained quite blank as he put the little cache of 
stolen objects back into the cardboard box. When he 
had finished, he turned to Dumbledore and said 
baldly, “I haven’t got any money.” 

“That is easily remedied,” said Dumbledore, drawing a 
leather money-pouch from his pocket. “There is a 
fund at Hogwarts for those who require assistance to 
buy books and robes. You might have to buy some of 
your spellbooks and so on secondhand, but — ” 

“Where do you buy spellbooks?” interrupted Riddle, 
who had taken the heavy money bag without 
thanking Dumbledore, and was now examining a fat 
gold Galleon. 

“In Diagon Alley,” said Dumbledore. “I have your list 
of books and school equipment with me. I can help 
you find everything — ” 

“You’re coming with me?” asked Riddle, looking up. 
“Certainly, if you — ” 

“I don’t need you,” said Riddle. “I’m used to doing 
things for myself, I go round London on my own all 
the time. How do you get to this Diagon Alley — sir?” 
he added, catching Dumbledore ’s eye. 

Harry thought that Dumbledore would insist upon 
accompanying Riddle, but once again he was 
surprised. Dumbledore handed Riddle the envelope 
containing his list of equipment, and after telling 
Riddle exactly how to get to the Leaky Cauldron from 
the orphanage, he said, “You will be able to see it, 
although Muggles around you — non-magical people, 
Page | 307 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




that is — will not. Ask for Tom the barman — easy 
enough to remember, as he shares your name — ” 

Riddle gave an irritable twitch, as though trying to 
displace an irksome fly. 

“You dislike the name Tom’?” 

“There are a lot of Toms,” muttered Riddle. Then, as 
though he could not suppress the question, as 
though it burst from him in spite of himself, he 
asked, “Was my father a wizard? He was called Tom 
Riddle too, they’ve told me.” 

“I’m afraid I don’t know,” said Dumbledore, his voice 
gentle. 

“My mother can’t have been magic, or she wouldn’t 
have died,” said Riddle, more to himself than 
Dumbledore. “It must’ve been him. So — when I’ve got 
all my stuff — when do I come to this Hogwarts?” 

“All the details are on the second piece of parchment 
in your envelope,” said Dumbledore. “You will leave 
from King’s Cross Station on the first of September. 
There is a train ticket in there too.” 

Riddle nodded. Dumbledore got to his feet and held 
out his hand again. Taking it, Riddle said, “I can 
speak to snakes. I found out when we’ve been to the 
country on trips — they find me, they whisper to me. 
Is that normal for a wizard?” 

Harry could tell that he had withheld mention of this 
strangest power until that moment, determined to 
impress. 

“It is unusual,” said Dumbledore, after a moment’s 
hesitation, “but not unheard of.” 

Page | 308 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




His tone was casual but his eyes moved curiously 
over Riddle’s face. They stood for a moment, man and 
boy, staring at each other. Then the handshake was 
broken; Dumbledore was at the door. 

“Good-bye, Tom. I shall see you at Hogwarts.” 

“I think that will do,” said the white-haired 
Dumbledore at Harry’s side, and seconds later, they 
were soaring weightlessly through darkness once 
more, before landing squarely in the present-day 
office. 

“Sit down,” said Dumbledore, landing beside Harry. 

Harry obeyed, his mind still full of what he had just 
seen. 

“He believed it much quicker than I did — I mean, 
when you told him he was a wizard,” said Harry. “I 
didn’t believe Hagrid at first, when he told me.” 

“Yes, Riddle was perfectly ready to believe that he was 
— to use his word — ‘special,’ ” said Dumbledore. 

“Did you know — then?” asked Harry. 

“Did I know that I had just met the most dangerous 
Dark wizard of all time?” said Dumbledore. “No, I had 
no idea that he was to grow up to be what he is. 
However, I was certainly intrigued by him. I returned 
to Hogwarts intending to keep an eye upon him, 
something I should have done in any case, given that 
he was alone and friendless, but which, already, I felt 
I ought to do for others’ sake as much as his. 

“His powers, as you heard, were surprisingly well- 
developed for such a young wizard and — most 
interestingly and ominously of all — he had already 

Page | 309 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




discovered that he had some measure of control over 
them, and begun to use them consciously. And as 
you saw, they were not the random experiments 
typical of young wizards: He was already using magic 
against other people, to frighten, to punish, to 
control. The little stories of the strangled rabbit and 
the young boy and girl he lured into a cave were most 
suggestive. ... ‘I can make them hurt if I want to. ...”’ 

“And he was a Parselmouth,” interjected Harry. 

“Yes, indeed; a rare ability, and one supposedly 
connected with the Dark Arts, although as we know, 
there are Parselmouths among the great and the good 
too. In fact, his ability to speak to serpents did not 
make me nearly as uneasy as his obvious instincts for 
cruelty, secrecy, and domination. 

“Time is making fools of us again,” said Dumbledore, 
indicating the dark sky beyond the windows. “But 
before we part, I want to draw your attention to 
certain features of the scene we have just witnessed, 
for they have a great bearing on the matters we shall 
be discussing in future meetings. 

“Firstly, I hope you noticed Riddle’s reaction when I 
mentioned that another shared his first name, Tom’?” 

Harry nodded. 

“There he showed his contempt for anything that tied 
him to other people, anything that made him 
ordinary. Even then, he wished to be different, 
separate, notorious. He shed his name, as you know, 
within a few short years of that conversation and 
created the mask of ‘Lord Voldemort’ behind which he 
has been hidden for so long. 



Page | 310 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I trust that you also noticed that Tom Riddle was 
already highly self-sufficient, secretive, and, 
apparently, friendless? He did not want help or 
companionship on his trip to Diagon Alley. He 
preferred to operate alone. The adult Voldemort is the 
same. You will hear many of his Death Eaters 
claiming that they are in his confidence, that they 
alone are close to him, even understand him. They 
are deluded. Lord Voldemort has never had a friend, 
nor do I believe that he has ever wanted one. 

“And lastly — I hope you are not too sleepy to pay 
attention to this, Harry — the young Tom Riddle liked 
to collect trophies. You saw the box of stolen articles 
he had hidden in his room. These were taken from 
victims of his bullying behavior, souvenirs, if you will, 
of particularly unpleasant bits of magic. Bear in mind 
this magpie-like tendency, for this, particularly, will 
be important later. 

“And now, it really is time for bed.” 

Harry got to his feet. As he walked across the room, 
his eyes fell upon the little table on which Marvolo 
Gaunt’s ring had rested last time, but the ring was no 
longer there. 

“Yes, Harry?” said Dumbledore, for Harry had come to 
a halt. 

“The ring’s gone,” said Harry, looking around. “But I 
thought you might have the mouth organ or 
something.” 

Dumbledore beamed at him, peering over the top of 
his half-moon spectacles. 

“Very astute, Harry, but the mouth organ was only 
ever a mouth organ.” 

Page | 311 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




And on that enigmatic note he waved to Harry, who 
understood himself to be dismissed. 



Page | 312 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 








FELIX FELICIS 

Harry had Herbology first thing the following 
morning. He had been unable to tell Ron and 
Hermione about his lesson with Dumbledore over 
breakfast for fear of being overheard, but he filled 
them in as they walked across the vegetable patch 
toward the greenhouses. The weekend’s brutal wind 
had died out at last; the weird mist had returned and 
it took them a little longer than usual to find the 
correct greenhouse. 

“Wow, scary thought, the boy You-Know-Who,” said 
Ron quietly, as they took their places around one of 
the gnarled Snargaluff stumps that formed this term’s 
project, and began pulling on their protective gloves. 
“But I still don’t get why Dumbledore’s showing you 
all this. I mean, it’s really interesting and everything, 
but what’s the point?” 

“Dunno,” said Harry, inserting a gum shield. “But he 
says it’s all important and it’ll help me survive.” 



Page | 313 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



“I think it’s fascinating,” said Hermione earnestly. “It 
makes absolute sense to know as much about 
Voldemort as possible. How else will you find out his 
weaknesses?” 

“So how was Slughorn’s latest party?” Harry asked 
her thickly through the gum shield. 

“Oh, it was quite fun, really,” said Hermione, now 
putting on protective goggles. “I mean, he drones on 
about famous ex-pupils a bit, and he absolutely 
fawns on McLaggen because he’s so well-connected, 
but he gave us some really nice food and he 
introduced us to Gwenog Jones.” 

“Gwenog Jones?” said Ron, his eyes widening under 
his own goggles. “The Gwenog Jones? Captain of the 
Holyhead Harpies?” 

“That’s right,” said Hermione. “Personally, I thought 
she was a bit full of herself, but — ” 

“Quite enough chat over here!” said Professor Sprout 
briskly, bustling over and looking stern. “You’re 
lagging behind, everybody else has started, and 
Neville’s already got his first pod!” 

They looked around; sure enough, there sat Neville 
with a bloody lip and several nasty scratches along 
the side of his face, but clutching an unpleasantly 
pulsating green object about the size of a grapefruit. 

“Okay, Professor, we’re starting now!” said Ron, 
adding quietly, when she had turned away again, 
“should’ve used Muffliato, Harry.” 

“No, we shouldn’t!” said Hermione at once, looking, as 
she always did, intensely cross at the thought of the 



Page | 314 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Half-Blood Prince and his spells. “Well, come on ... 
we’d better get going. ...” 



She gave the other two an apprehensive look; they all 
took deep breaths and then dived at the gnarled 
stump between them. 

It sprang to life at once; long, prickly, bramblelike 
vines flew out of the top and whipped through the air. 
One tangled itself in Hermione’s hair, and Ron beat it 
back with a pair of secateurs; Harry succeeded in 
trapping a couple of vines and knotting them 
together; a hole opened in the middle of all the 
tentaclelike branches; Hermione plunged her arm 
bravely into this hole, which closed like a trap around 
her elbow; Harry and Ron tugged and wrenched at 
the vines, forcing the hole to open again, and 
Hermione snatched her arm free, clutching in her 
fingers a pod just like Neville’s. At once, the prickly 
vines shot back inside, and the gnarled stump sat 
there looking like an innocently dead lump of wood. 

“You know, I don’t think I’ll be having any of these in 
my garden when I’ve got my own place,” said Ron, 
pushing his goggles up onto his forehead and wiping 
sweat from his face. 

“Pass me a bowl,” said Hermione, holding the 
pulsating pod at arm’s length; Harry handed one over 
and she dropped the pod into it with a look of disgust 
on her face. 

“Don’t be squeamish, squeeze it out, they’re best 
when they’re fresh!” called Professor Sprout. 

“Anyway,” said Hermione, continuing their 
interrupted conversation as though a lump of wood 
had not just attacked them, “Slughorn’s going to have 
a Christmas party, Harry, and there’s no way you’ll be 

Page | 315 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




able to wriggle out of this one because he actually 
asked me to check your free evenings, so he could be 
sure to have it on a night you can come.” 

Harry groaned. Meanwhile, Ron, who was attempting 
to burst the pod in the bowl by putting both hands on 
it, standing up, and squashing it as hard as he could, 
said angrily, “And this is another party just for 
Slughorn’s favorites, is it?” 

“Just for the Slug Club, yes,” said Hermione. 

The pod flew out from under Ron’s fingers and hit the 
greenhouse glass, rebounding onto the back of 
Professor Sprout’s head and knocking off her old, 
patched hat. Harry went to retrieve the pod; when he 
got back, Hermione was saying, “Look, / didn’t make 
up the name ‘Slug Club’ — ” 

“ ‘Slug Club,’ ” repeated Ron with a sneer worthy of 
Malfoy. “It’s pathetic. Well, I hope you enjoy your 
party. Why don’t you try hooking up with McLaggen, 
then Slughorn can make you King and Queen Slug — 



“We’re allowed to bring guests,” said Hermione, who 
for some reason had turned a bright, boiling scarlet, 
“and I was going to ask you to come, but if you think 
it’s that stupid then I won’t bother!” 

Harry suddenly wished the pod had flown a little 
farther, so that he need not have been sitting here 
with the pair of them. Unnoticed by either, he seized 
the bowl that contained the pod and began to try and 
open it by the noisiest and most energetic means he 
could think of; unfortunately, he could still hear every 
word of their conversation. 



Page | 316 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You were going to ask me?” asked Ron, in a 
completely different voice. 

“Yes,” said Hermione angrily. “But obviously if you’d 
rather I hooked up with McLaggen ...” 

There was a pause while Harry continued to pound 
the resilient pod with a trowel. 

“No, I wouldn’t,” said Ron, in a very quiet voice. 

Harry missed the pod, hit the bowl, and shattered it. 

“Reparo,” he said hastily, poking the pieces with his 
wand, and the bowl sprang back together again. The 
crash, however, appeared to have awoken Ron and 
Hermione to Harry’s presence. Hermione looked 
flustered and immediately started fussing about for 
her copy of Flesh-Eating Trees of the World to find out 
the correct way to juice Snargaluff pods; Ron, on the 
other hand, looked sheepish but also rather pleased 
with himself. 

“Hand that over, Harry,” said Hermione hurriedly. “It 
says we’re supposed to puncture them with 
something sharp. ...” 

Harry passed her the pod in the bowl; he and Ron 
both snapped their goggles back over their eyes and 
dived, once more, for the stump. 

It was not as though he was really surprised, thought 
Harry, as he wrestled with a thorny vine intent upon 
throttling him; he had had an inkling that this might 
happen sooner or later. But he was not sure how he 
felt about it. ... He and Cho were now too 
embarrassed to look at each other, let alone talk to 
each other; what if Ron and Hermione started going 
out together, then split up? Could their friendship 
Page | 317 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




survive it? Harry remembered the few weeks when 
they had not been talking to each other in the third 
year; he had not enjoyed trying to bridge the distance 
between them. And then, what if they didn’t split up? 
What if they became like Bill and Fleur, and it 
became excruciatingly embarrassing to be in their 
presence, so that he was shut out for good? 

“Gotcha!” yelled Ron, pulling a second pod from the 
stump just as Hermione managed to burst the first 
one open, so that the bowl was full of tubers wriggling 
like pale green worms. 

The rest of the lesson passed without further mention 
of Slughorn’s party. Although Harry watched his two 
friends more closely over the next few days, Ron and 
Hermione did not seem any different except that they 
were a little politer to each other than usual. Harry 
supposed he would just have to wait to see what 
happened under the influence of butterbeer in 
Slughorn’s dimly lit room on the night of the party. In 
the meantime, however, he had more pressing 
worries. 

Katie Bell was still in St. Mungo’s Hospital with no 
prospect of leaving, which meant that the promising 
Gryffindor team Harry had been training so carefully 
since September was one Chaser short. He kept 
putting off replacing Katie in the hope that she would 
return, but their opening match against Slytherin was 
looming, and he finally had to accept that she would 
not be back in time to play. 

Harry did not think he could stand another full- 
House tryout. With a sinking feeling that had little to 
do with Quidditch, he cornered Dean Thomas after 
Transfiguration one day. Most of the class had 
already left, although several twittering yellow birds 
were still zooming around the room, all of Hermione ’s 
Page | 318 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




creation; nobody else had succeeded in conjuring so 
much as a feather from thin air. 

“Are you still interested in playing Chaser?” 

“Wha — ? Yeah, of course!” said Dean excitedly. Over 
Dean’s shoulder, Harry saw Seamus Finnigan 
slamming his books into his bag, looking sour. One of 
the reasons why Harry would have preferred not to 
have to ask Dean to play was that he knew Seamus 
would not like it. On the other hand, he had to do 
what was best for the team, and Dean had outflown 
Seamus at the tryouts. 

“Well then, you’re in,” said Harry. “There’s a practice 
tonight, seven o’clock.” 

“Right,” said Dean. “Cheers, Harry! Blimey, I can’t 
wait to tell Ginny!” 

He sprinted out of the room, leaving Harry and 
Seamus alone together, an uncomfortable moment 
made no easier when a bird dropping landed on 
Seamus’s head as one of Hermione’s canaries whizzed 
over them. 

Seamus was not the only person disgruntled by the 
choice of Katie’s substitute. There was much 
muttering in the common room about the fact that 
Harry had now chosen two of his classmates for the 
team. As Harry had endured much worse mutterings 
than this in his school career, he was not particularly 
bothered, but all the same, the pressure was 
increasing to provide a win in the upcoming match 
against Slytherin. If Gryffindor won, Harry knew that 
the whole House would forget that they had criticized 
him and swear that they had always known it was a 
great team. If they lost ... well, Harry thought wryly, 
he had still endured worse mutterings. ... 

Page | 319 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry had no reason to regret his choice once he saw 
Dean fly that evening; he worked well with Ginny and 
Demelza. The Beaters, Peakes and Coote, were getting 
better all the time. The only problem was Ron. 

Harry had known all along that Ron was an 
inconsistent player who suffered from nerves and a 
lack of confidence, and unfortunately, the looming 
prospect of the opening game of the season seemed to 
have brought out all his old insecurities. After letting 
in half a dozen goals, most of them scored by Ginny, 
his technique became wilder and wilder, until he 
finally punched an oncoming Demelza Robins in the 
mouth. 

“It was an accident, I’m sorry, Demelza, really sorry!” 
Ron shouted after her as she zigzagged back to the 
ground, dripping blood everywhere. “I just — ” 

“Panicked,” Ginny said angrily, landing next to 
Demelza and examining her fat lip. “You prat, Ron, 
look at the state of her!” 

“I can fix that,” said Harry, landing beside the two 
girls, pointing his wand at Demelza’s mouth, and 
saying “Episkey.” “And Ginny, don’t call Ron a prat, 
you’re not the Captain of this team — ” 

“Well, you seemed too busy to call him a prat and I 
thought someone should — ” 

Harry forced himself not to laugh. 

“In the air, everyone, let’s go. ...” 

Overall it was one of the worst practices they had had 
all term, though Harry did not feel that honesty was 
the best policy when they were this close to the 
match. 

Page | 320 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Good work, everyone, I think we’ll flatten Slytherin,” 
he said bracingly and the Chasers and Beaters left 
the changing room looking reasonably happy with 
themselves. 

“I played like a sack of dragon dung,” said Ron in a 
hollow voice when the door had swung shut behind 
Ginny. 

“No, you didn’t,” said Harry firmly. “You’re the best 
Keeper I tried out, Ron. Your only problem is nerves.” 

He kept up a relentless flow of encouragement all the 
way back to the castle, and by the time they reached 
the second floor, Ron was looking marginally more 
cheerful. When Harry pushed open the tapestry to 
take their usual shortcut up to Gryffindor Tower, 
however, they found themselves looking at Dean and 
Ginny, who were locked in a close embrace and 
kissing fiercely as though glued together. 

It was as though something large and scaly erupted 
into life in Harry’s stomach, clawing at his insides: 

Hot blood seemed to flood his brain, so that all 
thought was extinguished, replaced by a savage urge 
to jinx Dean into a jelly. Wrestling with this sudden 
madness, he heard Ron’s voice as though from a great 
distance away. 

“Oi!” 



Dean and Ginny broke apart and looked around. 
“What?” said Ginny. 

“I don’t want to find my own sister snogging people in 
public!” 



Page | 321 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“This was a deserted corridor till you came butting 
in!” said Ginny. 

Dean was looking embarrassed. He gave Harry a 
shifty grin that Harry did not return, as the newborn 
monster inside him was roaring for Dean’s instant 
dismissal from the team. 

“Er ... c’mon, Ginny,” said Dean, “let’s go back to the 
common room. ...” 

“You go!” said Ginny. “I want a word with my dear 
brother!” 

Dean left, looking as though he was not sorry to 
depart the scene. 

“Right,” said Ginny, tossing her long red hair out of 
her face and glaring at Ron, “let’s get this straight 
once and for all. It is none of your business who I go 
out with or what I do with them, Ron — ” 

“Yeah, it is!” said Ron, just as angrily. “D’you think I 
want people saying my sister’s a — ” 

“A what?” shouted Ginny, drawing her wand. “A what, 
exactly?” 

“He doesn’t mean anything, Ginny — ” said Harry 
automatically, though the monster was roaring its 
approval of Ron’s words. 

“Oh yes he does!” she said, flaring up at Harry. “Just 
because he’s never snogged anyone in his life, just 
because the best kiss he’s ever had is from our Auntie 
Muriel — ” 

“Shut your mouth!” bellowed Ron, bypassing red and 
turning maroon. 

Page | 322 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No, I will not!” yelled Ginny, beside herself. “I’ve seen 
you with Phlegm, hoping shell kiss you on the cheek 
every time you see her, it’s pathetic! If you went out 
and got a bit of snogging done yourself, you wouldn’t 
mind so much that everyone else does it!” 

Ron had pulled out his wand too; Harry stepped 
swiftly between them. 

“You don’t know what you’re talking about!” Ron 
roared, trying to get a clear shot at Ginny around 
Harry, who was now standing in front of her with his 
arms outstretched. “Just because I don’t do it in 
public — !” 

Ginny screamed with derisive laughter, trying to push 
Harry out of the way. 

“Been kissing Pigwidgeon, have you? Or have you got 
a picture of Auntie Muriel stashed under your 
pillow?” 

“You—” 

A streak of orange light flew under Harry’s left arm 
and missed Ginny by inches; Harry pushed Ron up 
against the wall. 

“Don’t be stupid — ” 

“Harry’s snogged Cho Chang!” shouted Ginny, who 
sounded close to tears now. “And Hermione snogged 
Viktor Krum, it’s only you who acts like it’s something 
disgusting, Ron, and that’s because you’ve got about 
as much experience as a twelve-year-old!” 

And with that, she stormed away. Harry quickly let go 
of Ron; the look on his face was murderous. They 
both stood there, breathing heavily, until Mrs. Norris, 

Page | 323 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Filch ’s cat, appeared around the corner, which broke 
the tension. 



“C’mon,” said Harry, as the sound of Filch ’s shuffling 
feet reached their ears. 

They hurried up the stairs and along a seventh-floor 
corridor. “Oi, out of the way!” Ron barked at a small 
girl who jumped in fright and dropped a bottle of 
toadspawn. 

Harry hardly noticed the sound of shattering glass; he 
felt disoriented, dizzy; being struck by a lightning bolt 
must be something like this. It’s just because she’s 
Ron’s sister, he told himself. You just didn’t like seeing 
her kissing Dean because she’s Ron’s sister. ... 

But unbidden into his mind came an image of that 
same deserted corridor with himself kissing Ginny 
instead. ... The monster in his chest purred ... but 
then he saw Ron ripping open the tapestry curtain 
and drawing his wand on Harry, shouting things like 
“betrayal of trust” . . . “supposed to be my friend” . . . 

“D’you think Hermione did snog Krum?” Ron asked 
abruptly, as they approached the Fat Lady. Harry 
gave a guilty start and wrenched his imagination 
away from a corridor in which no Ron intruded, in 
which he and Ginny were quite alone — 

“What?” he said confusedly. “Oh ... er ...” 

The honest answer was “yes,” but he did not want to 
give it. However, Ron seemed to gather the worst from 
the look on Harry’s face. 

“Dilligrout,” he said darkly to the Fat Lady, and they 
climbed through the portrait hole into the common 
room. 

Page | 324 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Neither of them mentioned Ginny or Hermione again; 
indeed, they barely spoke to each other that evening 
and got into bed in silence, each absorbed in his own 
thoughts. 

Harry lay awake for a long time, looking up at the 
canopy of his four-poster and trying to convince 
himself that his feelings for Ginny were entirely elder- 
brotherly. They had lived, had they not, like brother 
and sister all summer, playing Quidditch, teasing 
Ron, and having a laugh about Bill and Phlegm? He 
had known Ginny for years now. ... It was natural 
that he should feel protective . . . natural that he 
should want to look out for her . . . want to rip Dean 
limb from limb for kissing her ... No ... he would have 
to control that particular brotherly feeling. . . . 

Ron gave a great grunting snore. 

She’s Ron’s sister, Harry told himself firmly. Ron’s 
sister. She’s out-of-bounds. He would not risk his 
friendship with Ron for anything. He punched his 
pillow into a more comfortable shape and waited for 
sleep to come, trying his utmost not to allow his 
thoughts to stray anywhere near Ginny. 

Harry awoke next morning feeling slightly dazed and 
confused by a series of dreams in which Ron had 
chased him with a Beater’s bat, but by midday he 
would have happily exchanged the dream Ron for the 
real one, who was not only cold-shouldering Ginny 
and Dean, but also treating a hurt and bewildered 
Hermione with an icy, sneering indifference. What 
was more, Ron seemed to have become, overnight, as 
touchy and ready to lash out as the average Blast- 
Ended Skrewt. Harry spent the day attempting to 
keep the peace between Ron and Hermione with no 
success; finally, Hermione departed for bed in high 
dudgeon, and Ron stalked off to the boys’ dormitory 
Page | 325 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




after swearing angrily at several frightened first years 
for looking at him. 

To Harry’s dismay, Ron’s new aggression did not wear 
off over the next few days. Worse still, it coincided 
with an even deeper dip in his Keeping skills, which 
made him still more aggressive, so that during the 
final Quidditch practice before Saturday’s match, he 
failed to save every single goal the Chasers aimed at 
him, but bellowed at everybody so much that he 
reduced Demelza Robins to tears. 

“You shut up and leave her alone!” shouted Peakes, 
who was about two-thirds Ron’s height, though 
admittedly carrying a heavy bat. 

“ENOUGH!” bellowed Harry, who had seen Ginny 
glowering in Ron’s direction and, remembering her 
reputation as an accomplished caster of the Bat- 
Bogey Hex, soared over to intervene before things got 
out of hand. “Peakes, go and pack up the Bludgers. 
Demelza, pull yourself together, you played really well 
today. Ron ...” he waited until the rest of the team 
were out of earshot before saying it, “you’re my best 
mate, but carry on treating the rest of them like this 
and I’m going to kick you off the team.” 

He really thought for a moment that Ron might hit 
him, but then something much worse happened: Ron 
seemed to sag on his broom; all the fight went out of 
him and he said, “I resign. I’m pathetic.” 

“You’re not pathetic and you’re not resigning!” said 
Harry fiercely, seizing Ron by the front of his robes. 
“You can save anything when you’re on form, it’s a 
mental problem you’ve got!” 

“You calling me mental?” 



Page | 326 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah, maybe I am!” 

They glared at each other for a moment, then Ron 
shook his head wearily. “I know you haven’t got any 
time to find another Keeper, so I’ll play tomorrow, but 
if we lose, and we will, I’m taking myself off the team.” 

Nothing Harry said made any difference. He tried 
boosting Ron’s confidence all through dinner, but Ron 
was too busy being grumpy and surly with Hermione 
to notice. Harry persisted in the common room that 
evening, but his assertion that the whole team would 
be devastated if Ron left was somewhat undermined 
by the fact that the rest of the team was sitting in a 
huddle in a distant corner, clearly muttering about 
Ron and casting him nasty looks. Finally Harry tried 
getting angry again in the hope of provoking Ron into 
a defiant, and hopefully goal-saving, attitude, but this 
strategy did not appear to work any better than 
encouragement; Ron went to bed as dejected and 
hopeless as ever. 

Harry lay awake for a very long time in the darkness. 
He did not want to lose the upcoming match; not only 
was it his first as Captain, but he was determined to 
beat Draco Malfoy at Quidditch even if he could not 
yet prove his suspicions about him. Yet if Ron played 
as he had done in the last few practices, their 
chances of winning were very slim. ... 

If only there was something he could do to make Ron 
pull himself together . . . make him play at the top of 
his form . . . something that would ensure that Ron 
had a really good day. ... 

And the answer came to Harry in one, sudden, 
glorious stroke of inspiration. 



Page | 327 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Breakfast was the usual excitable affair next morning; 
the Slytherins hissed and booed loudly as every 
member of the Gryffindor team entered the Great 
Hall. Harry glanced at the ceiling and saw a clear, 
pale blue sky: a good omen. 

The Gryffindor table, a solid mass of red and gold, 
cheered as Harry and Ron approached. Harry grinned 
and waved; Ron grimaced weakly and shook his head. 

“Cheer up, Ron!” called Lavender. “I know you’ll be 
brilliant!” 

Ron ignored her. 

“Tea?” Harry asked him. “Coffee? Pumpkin juice?” 

“Anything,” said Ron glumly, taking a moody bite of 
toast. 

A few minutes later Hermione, who had become so 
tired of Ron’s recent unpleasant behavior that she 
had not come down to breakfast with them, paused 
on her way up the table. 

“How are you both feeling?” she asked tentatively, her 
eyes on the back of Ron’s head. 

“Fine,” said Harry, who was concentrating on handing 
Ron a glass of pumpkin juice. “There you go, Ron. 
Drink up.” 

Ron had just raised the glass to his lips when 
Hermione spoke sharply. 

“Don’t drink that, Ron!” 

Both Harry and Ron looked up at her. 



Page | 328 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Why not?” said Ron. 



Hermione was now staring at Harry as though she 
could not believe her eyes. 

“You just put something in that drink.” 

“Excuse me?” said Harry. 

“You heard me. I saw you. You just tipped something 
into Ron’s drink. You’ve got the bottle in your hand 
right now!” 

“I don’t know what you’re talking about,” said Harry, 
stowing the little bottle hastily in his pocket. 

“Ron, I warn you, don’t drink it!” Hermione said 
again, alarmed, but Ron picked up the glass, drained 
it in one gulp, and said, “Stop bossing me around, 
Hermione.” 

She looked scandalized. Bending low so that only 
Harry could hear her, she hissed, “You should be 
expelled for that. I’d never have believed it of you, 
Harry!” 

“Hark who’s talking,” he whispered back. “Confunded 
anyone lately?” 

She stormed up the table away from them. Harry 
watched her go without regret. Hermione had never 
really understood what a serious business Quidditch 
was. He then looked around at Ron, who was 
smacking his lips. 

“Nearly time,” said Harry blithely. 

The frosty grass crunched underfoot as they strode 
down to the stadium. 

Page | 329 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Pretty lucky the weather’s this good, eh?” Harry 
asked Ron. 



“Yeah,” said Ron, who was pale and sick-looking. 

Ginny and Demelza were already wearing their 
Quidditch robes and waiting in the changing room. 

“Conditions look ideal,” said Ginny, ignoring Ron. 

“And guess what? That Slytherin Chaser Vaisey — he 
took a Bludger in the head yesterday during their 
practice, and he’s too sore to play! And even better 
than that — Malfoy’s gone off sick too!” 

“ What?” said Harry, wheeling around to stare at her. 
“He’s ill? What’s wrong with him?” 

“No idea, but it’s great for us,” said Ginny brightly. 
“They’re playing Harper instead; he’s in my year and 
he’s an idiot.” 

Harry smiled back vaguely, but as he pulled on his 
scarlet robes his mind was far from Quidditch. Malfoy 
had once before claimed he could not play due to 
injury, but on that occasion he had made sure the 
whole match was rescheduled for a time that suited 
the Slytherins better. Why was he now happy to let a 
substitute go on? Was he really ill, or was he faking? 

“Fishy, isn’t it?” he said in an undertone to Ron. 
“Malfoy not playing?” 

“Lucky, I call it,” said Ron, looking slightly more 
animated. “And Vaisey off too, he’s their best goal 
scorer, I didn’t fancy — hey!” he said suddenly, 
freezing halfway through pulling on his Keeper’s 
gloves and staring at Harry. 

“What?” 

Page | 330 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I ... you ...” Ron had dropped his voice, he looked 
both scared and excited. “My drink ... my pumpkin 
juice ... you didn’t ... ?” 

Harry raised his eyebrows, but said nothing except, 
“Well be starting in about five minutes, you’d better 
get your boots on.” 

They walked out onto the pitch to tumultuous roars 
and boos. One end of the stadium was solid red and 
gold; the other, a sea of green and silver. Many 
Hufflepuffs and Ravenclaws had taken sides too: 
Amidst all the yelling and clapping Harry could 
distinctly hear the roar of Luna Lovegood’s famous 
lion-topped hat. 

Harry stepped up to Madam Hooch, the referee, who 
was standing ready to release the balls from the crate. 

“Captains shake hands,” she said, and Harry had his 
hand crushed by the new Slytherin Captain, 

Urquhart. “Mount your brooms. On the whistle ... 
three ... two ... one ...” 

The whistle sounded, Harry and the others kicked off 
hard from the frozen ground, and they were away. 

Harry soared around the perimeter of the grounds, 
looking around for the Snitch and keeping one eye on 
Harper, who was zigzagging far below him. Then a 
voice that was jarringly different to the usual 
commentator’s started up. 

“Well, there they go, and I think we’re all surprised to 
see the team that Potter’s put together this year. 

Many thought, given Ronald Weasley’s patchy 
performance as Keeper last year, that he might be off 
the team, but of course, a close personal friendship 
with the Captain does help. ...” 

Page | 331 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




These words were greeted with jeers and applause 
from the Slytherin end of the pitch. Harry craned 
around on his broom to look toward the 
commentator’s podium. A tall, skinny blond boy with 
an upturned nose was standing there, talking into the 
magical megaphone that had once been Lee Jordan’s; 
Harry recognized Zacharias Smith, a Hufflepuff player 
whom he heartily disliked. 

“Oh, and here comes Slytherin ’s first attempt on goal, 
it’s Urquhart streaking down the pitch and — ” 

Harry’s stomach turned over. 

“ — Weasley saves it, well, he’s bound to get lucky 
sometimes, I suppose. ...” 

“That’s right, Smith, he is,” muttered Harry, grinning 
to himself, as he dived amongst the Chasers with his 
eyes searching all around for some hint of the elusive 
Snitch. 

With half an hour of the game gone, Gryffindor were 
leading sixty points to zero, Ron having made some 
truly spectacular saves, some by the very tips of his 
gloves, and Ginny having scored four of Gryffindor’s 
six goals. This effectively stopped Zacharias 
wondering loudly whether the two Weasleys were only 
there because Harry liked them, and he started on 
Peakes and Coote instead. 

“Of course, Coote isn’t really the usual build for a 
Beater,” said Zacharias loftily, “they’ve generally got a 
bit more muscle — ” 

“Hit a Bludger at him!” Harry called to Coote as he 
zoomed past, but Coote, grinning broadly, chose to 
aim the next Bludger at Harper instead, who was just 
passing Harry in the opposite direction. Harry was 

Page | 332 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




pleased to hear the dull thunk that meant the 
Bludger had found its mark. 

It seemed as though Gryffindor could do no wrong. 
Again and again they scored, and again and again, at 
the other end of the pitch, Ron saved goals with 
apparent ease. He was actually smiling now, and 
when the crowd greeted a particularly good save with 
a rousing chorus of the old favorite “Weasley Is Our 
King,” he pretended to conduct them from on high. 

“Thinks he’s something special today, doesn’t he?” 
said a snide voice, and Harry was nearly knocked off 
his broom as Harper collided with him hard and 
deliberately. “Your blood-traitor pal ...” 

Madam Hooch’s back was turned, and though 
Gryffindors below shouted in anger, by the time she 
looked around, Harper had already sped off. His 
shoulder aching, Harry raced after him, determined to 
ram him back. . . . 

“And I think Harper of Slytherin’s seen the Snitch!” 
said Zacharias Smith through his megaphone. “Yes, 
he’s certainly seen something Potter hasn’t!” 

Smith really was an idiot, thought Harry, hadn’t he 
noticed them collide? But next moment, his stomach 
seemed to drop out of the sky — Smith was right and 
Harry was wrong: Harper had not sped upward at 
random; he had spotted what Harry had not: The 
Snitch was speeding along high above them, glinting 
brightly against the clear blue sky. 

Harry accelerated; the wind was whistling in his ears 
so that it drowned all sound of Smith’s commentary 
or the crowd, but Harper was still ahead of him, and 
Gryffindor was only a hundred points up; if Harper 



Page | 333 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




got there first Gryffindor had lost . . . and now Harper 
was feet from it, his hand outstretched. ... 

“Oi, Harper!” yelled Harry in desperation. “How much 
did Malfoy pay you to come on instead of him?” 

He did not know what made him say it, but Harper 
did a double-take; he fumbled the Snitch, let it slip 
through his fingers, and shot right past it. Harry 
made a great swipe for the tiny, fluttering ball and 
caught it. 

“YES!” Harry yelled. Wheeling around, he hurtled 
back toward the ground, the Snitch held high in his 
hand. As the crowd realized what had happened, a 
great shout went up that almost drowned the sound 
of the whistle that signaled the end of the game. 

“Ginny, where ’re you going?” yelled Harry, who had 
found himself trapped in the midst of a mass midair 
hug with the rest of the team, but Ginny sped right 
on past them until, with an almighty crash, she 
collided with the commentator’s podium. As the 
crowd shrieked and laughed, the Gryffindor team 
landed beside the wreckage of wood under which 
Zacharias was feebly stirring; Harry heard Ginny 
saying blithely to an irate Professor McGonagall, 
“Forgot to brake, Professor, sorry.” 

Laughing, Harry broke free of the rest of the team and 
hugged Ginny, but let go very quickly. Avoiding her 
gaze, he clapped a cheering Ron on the back instead 
as, all enmity forgotten, the Gryffindor team left the 
pitch arm in arm, punching the air and waving to 
their supporters. 

The atmosphere in the changing room was jubilant. 



Page | 334 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Party up in the common room, Seamus said!” yelled 
Dean exuberantly. “C’mon, Ginny, Demelza!” 

Ron and Harry were the last two in the changing 
room. They were just about to leave when Hermione 
entered. She was twisting her Gryffindor scarf in her 
hands and looked upset but determined. 

“I want a word with you, Harry.” She took a deep 
breath. “You shouldn’t have done it. You heard 
Slughorn, it’s illegal.” 

“What are you going to do, turn us in?” demanded 
Ron. 

“What are you two talking about?” asked Harry, 
turning away to hang up his robes so that neither of 
them would see him grinning. 

“You know perfectly well what we’re talking about!” 
said Hermione shrilly. “You spiked Ron’s juice with 
lucky potion at breakfast! Felix Felicis!” 

“No, I didn’t,” said Harry, turning back to face them 
both. 

“Yes you did, Harry, and that’s why everything went 
right, there were Slytherin players missing and Ron 
saved everything!” 

“I didn’t put it in!” said Harry, grinning broadly. He 
slipped his hand inside his jacket pocket and drew 
out the tiny bottle that Hermione had seen in his 
hand that morning. It was full of golden potion and 
the cork was still tightly sealed with wax. “I wanted 
Ron to think I’d done it, so I faked it when I knew you 
were looking.” He looked at Ron. “You saved 
everything because you felt lucky. You did it all 
yourself.” 

Page | 335 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




He pocketed the potion again. 



“There really wasn’t anything in my pumpkin juice?” 
Ron said, astounded. “But the weather’s good ... and 
Vaisey couldn’t play. ... I honestly haven’t been given 
lucky potion?” 

Harry shook his head. Ron gaped at him for a 
moment, then rounded on Hermione, imitating her 
voice. “ You added Felix Felicis to Ron’s juice this 
morning, that’s why he saved every thing\ See! I can 
save goals without help, Hermione!” 

“I never said you couldn’t — Ron, you thought you’d 
been given it too!” 

But Ron had already strode past her out of the door 
with his broomstick over his shoulder. 

“Er,” said Harry into the sudden silence; he had not 
expected his plan to backfire like this, “shall ... shall 
we go up to the party, then?” 

“You go!” said Hermione, blinking back tears. “I’m 
sick of Ron at the moment, I don’t know what I’m 
supposed to have done. ...” 

And she stormed out of the changing room too. 

Harry walked slowly back up the grounds toward the 
castle through the crowd, many of whom shouted 
congratulations at him, but he felt a great sense of 
letdown; he had been sure that if Ron won the match, 
he and Hermione would be friends again immediately. 
He did not see how he could possibly explain to 
Hermione that what she had done to offend Ron was 
kiss Viktor Krum, not when the offense had occurred 
so long ago. 



Page | 336 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry could not see Hermione at the Gryffindor 
celebration party, which was in full swing when he 
arrived. Renewed cheers and clapping greeted his 
appearance, and he was soon surrounded by a mob of 
people congratulating him. What with trying to shake 
off the Creevey brothers, who wanted a blow-by-blow 
match analysis, and the large group of girls that 
encircled him, laughing at his least amusing 
comments and batting their eyelids, it was some time 
before he could try and find Ron. At last, he 
extricated himself from Romilda Vane, who was 
hinting heavily that she would like to go to Slughorn’s 
Christmas party with him. As he was ducking toward 
the drinks table, he walked straight into Ginny, 

Arnold the Pygmy Puff riding on her shoulder and 
Crookshanks mewing hopefully at her heels. 

“Looking for Ron?” she asked, smirking. “He’s over 
there, the filthy hypocrite.” 

Harry looked into the corner she was indicating. 

There, in full view of the whole room, stood Ron 
wrapped so closely around Lavender Brown it was 
hard to tell whose hands were whose. 

“It looks like he’s eating her face, doesn’t it?” said 
Ginny dispassionately. “But I suppose he’s got to 
refine his technique somehow. Good game, Harry.” 

She patted him on the arm; Harry felt a swooping 
sensation in his stomach, but then she walked off to 
help herself to more butterbeer. Crookshanks trotted 
after her, his yellow eyes fixed upon Arnold. 

Harry turned away from Ron, who did not look like he 
would be surfacing soon, just as the portrait hole was 
closing. With a sinking feeling, he thought he saw a 
mane of bushy brown hair whipping out of sight. 



Page | 337 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




He darted forward, sidestepped Romilda Vane again, 
and pushed open the portrait of the Fat Lady. The 
corridor outside seemed to be deserted. 

“Hermione?” 

He found her in the first unlocked classroom he tried. 
She was sitting on the teacher’s desk, alone except for 
a small ring of twittering yellow birds circling her 
head, which she had clearly just conjured out of 
midair. Harry could not help admiring her spell-work 
at a time like this. 

“Oh, hello, Harry,” she said in a brittle voice. “I was 
just practicing.” 

“Yeah ... they’re — er — really good. ...” said Harry. 

He had no idea what to say to her. He was just 
wondering whether there was any chance that she 
had not noticed Ron, that she had merely left the 
room because the party was a little too rowdy, when 
she said, in an unnaturally high-pitched voice, “Ron 
seems to be enjoying the celebrations.” 

“Er . . . does he?” said Harry. 

“Don’t pretend you didn’t see him,” said Hermione. 

“He wasn’t exactly hiding it, was — ?” 

The door behind them burst open. To Harry’s horror, 
Ron came in, laughing, pulling Lavender by the hand. 

“Oh,” he said, drawing up short at the sight of Harry 
and Hermione. 

“Oops!” said Lavender, and she backed out of the 
room, giggling. The door swung shut behind her. 



Page | 338 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




There was a horrible, swelling, billowing silence. 
Hermione was staring at Ron, who refused to look at 
her, but said with an odd mixture of bravado and 
awkwardness, “Hi, Harry! Wondered where you’d got 
to!” 

Hermione slid off the desk. The little flock of golden 
birds continued to twitter in circles around her head 
so that she looked like a strange, feathery model of 
the solar system. 

“You shouldn’t leave Lavender waiting outside,” she 
said quietly. “She’ll wonder where you’ve gone.” 

She walked very slowly and erectly toward the door. 
Harry glanced at Ron, who was looking relieved that 
nothing worse had happened. 

“ Oppugno\” came a shriek from the doorway. 

Harry spun around to see Hermione pointing her 
wand at Ron, her expression wild: The little flock of 
birds was speeding like a hail of fat golden bullets 
toward Ron, who yelped and covered his face with his 
hands, but the birds attacked, pecking and clawing at 
every bit of flesh they could reach. 

“Gerremoffme!” he yelled, but with one last look of 
vindictive fury, Hermione wrenched open the door 
and disappeared through it. Harry thought he heard a 
sob before it slammed. 



Page | 339 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






THE UNBREAKABLE VOW 

Snow was swirling against the icy windows once 
more; Christmas was approaching fast. Hagrid had 
already single-handedly delivered the usual twelve 
Christmas trees for the Great Hall; garlands of holly 
and tinsel had been twisted around the banisters of 
the stairs; everlasting candles glowed from inside the 
helmets of suits of armor and great bunches of 
mistletoe had been hung at intervals along the 
corridors. Large groups of girls tended to converge 
underneath the mistletoe bunches every time Harry 
went past, which caused blockages in the corridors; 
fortunately, however, Harry’s frequent nighttime 
wanderings had given him an unusually good 
knowledge of the castle’s secret passageways, so that 
he was able, without too much difficulty, to navigate 
mistletoe-free routes between classes. 

Ron, who might once have found the necessity of 
these detours a cause for jealousy rather than 
hilarity, simply roared with laughter about it all. 
Although Harry much preferred this new laughing, 



Page | 340 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



joking Ron to the moody, aggressive model he had 
been enduring for the last few weeks, the improved 
Ron came at a heavy price. Firstly, Harry had to put 
up with the frequent presence of Lavender Brown, 
who seemed to regard any moment that she was not 
kissing Ron as a moment wasted; and secondly, 

Harry found himself once more the best friend of two 
people who seemed unlikely ever to speak to each 
other again. 

Ron, whose hands and forearms still bore scratches 
and cuts from Hermione’s bird attack, was taking a 
defensive and resentful tone. 

“She can’t complain,” he told Harry. “She snogged 
Krum. So she’s found out someone wants to snog me 
too. Well, it’s a free country. I haven’t done anything 
wrong.” 

Harry did not answer, but pretended to be absorbed 
in the book they were supposed to have read before 
Charms next morning (Quintessence: A Quest). 
Determined as he was to remain friends with both 
Ron and Hermione, he was spending a lot of time with 
his mouth shut tight. 

“I never promised Hermione anything,” Ron mumbled. 
“I mean, all right, I was going to go to Slughorn’s 
Christmas party with her, but she never said ... just 
as friends ... I’m a free agent. ...” 

Harry turned a page of Quintessence, aware that Ron 
was watching him. Ron’s voice tailed away in mutters, 
barely audible over the loud crackling of the fire, 
though Harry thought he caught the words “Krum” 
and “can’t complain” again. 

Hermione’s schedule was so full that Harry could only 
talk to her properly in the evenings, when Ron was, in 

Page | 341 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




any case, so tightly wrapped around Lavender that he 
did not notice what Harry was doing. Hermione 
refused to sit in the common room while Ron was 
there, so Harry generally joined her in the library, 
which meant that their conversations were held in 
whispers. 

“He’s at perfect liberty to kiss whomever he likes,” 
said Hermione, while the librarian, Madam Pince, 
prowled the shelves behind them. “I really couldn’t 
care less.” 

She raised her quill and dotted an i so ferociously 
that she punctured a hole in her parchment. Harry 
said nothing. He thought his voice might soon vanish 
from lack of use. He bent a little lower over Advanced 
Potion-Making and continued to make notes on 
Everlasting Elixirs, occasionally pausing to decipher 
the Prince’s useful additions to Libatius Borage’s text. 

“And incidentally,” said Hermione, after a few 
moments, “you need to be careful.” 

“For the last time,” said Harry, speaking in a slightly 
hoarse whisper after three-quarters of an hour of 
silence, “I am not giving back this book, I’ve learned 
more from the Half-Blood Prince than Snape or 
Slughorn have taught me in — ” 

“I’m not talking about your stupid so-called Prince,” 
said Hermione, giving his book a nasty look as though 
it had been rude to her. “I’m talking about earlier. I 
went into the girls’ bathroom just before I came in 
here and there were about a dozen girls in there, 
including that Romilda Vane, trying to decide how to 
slip you a love potion. They’re all hoping they’re going 
to get you to take them to Slughorn ’s party, and they 
all seem to have bought Fred and George’s love 
potions, which I’m afraid to say probably work — ” 
Page | 342 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Why didn’t you confiscate them then?” demanded 
Harry. It seemed extraordinary that Hermione’s mania 
for upholding rules could have abandoned her at this 
crucial juncture. 

“They didn’t have the potions with them in the 
bathroom,” said Hermione scornfully. “They were just 
discussing tactics. As I doubt whether even the Half- 
Blood Prince ” — she gave the book another nasty look 
— “could dream up an antidote for a dozen different 
love potions at once, I’d just invite someone to go with 
you, thatll stop all the others thinking they’ve still got 
a chance. It’s tomorrow night, they’re getting 
desperate.” 

“There isn’t anyone I want to invite,” mumbled Harry, 
who was still trying not to think about Ginny any 
more than he could help, despite the fact that she 
kept cropping up in his dreams in ways that made 
him devoutly thankful that Ron could not perform 
Legilimency. 

“Well, just be careful what you drink, because 
Romilda Vane looked like she meant business,” said 
Hermione grimly. 

She hitched up the long roll of parchment on which 
she was writing her Arithmancy essay and continued 
to scratch away with her quill. Harry watched her 
with his mind a long way away. 

“Hang on a moment,” he said slowly. “I thought Filch 
had banned anything bought at Weasleys’ Wizard 
Wheezes?” 

“And when has anyone ever paid attention to what 
Filch has banned?” asked Hermione, still 
concentrating on her essay. 



Page | 343 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“But I thought all the owls were being searched. So 
how come these girls are able to bring love potions 
into school?” 

“Fred and George send them disguised as perfumes 
and cough potions,” said Hermione. “It’s part of their 
Owl Order Service.” 

“You know a lot about it.” 

Hermione gave him the kind of nasty look she had 
just given his copy of Advanced Potion-Making. 

“It was all on the back of the bottles they showed 
Ginny and me in the summer,” she said coldly. “I 
don’t go around putting potions in people’s drinks ... 
or pretending to, either, which is just as bad. ...” 

“Yeah, well, never mind that,” said Harry quickly. 

“The point is, Filch is being fooled, isn’t he? These 
girls are getting stuff into the school disguised as 
something else! So why couldn’t Malfoy have brought 
the necklace into the school — ?” 

“Oh, Harry ... not that again ...” 

“Come on, why not?” demanded Harry. 

“Look,” sighed Hermione, “Secrecy Sensors detect 
jinxes, curses, and concealment charms, don’t they? 
They’re used to find Dark Magic and Dark objects. 
They’d have picked up a powerful curse, like the one 
on that necklace, within seconds. But something 
that’s just been put in the wrong bottle wouldn’t 
register — and anyway, love potions aren’t Dark or 
dangerous — ” 

“Easy for you to say,” muttered Harry, thinking of 
Romilda Vane. 

Page | 344 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“ — so it would be down to Filch to realize it wasn’t a 
cough potion, and he’s not a very good wizard, I doubt 
he can tell one potion from — ” 

Hermione stopped dead; Harry had heard it too. 
Somebody had moved close behind them among the 
dark bookshelves. They waited, and a moment later 
the vulturelike countenance of Madam Pince 
appeared around the corner, her sunken cheeks, her 
skin like parchment, and her long hooked nose 
illuminated unflatteringly by the lamp she was 
carrying. 

“The library is now closed,” she said. “Mind you 
return anything you have borrowed to the correct — 
what have you been doing to that book, you depraved 
boy?” 

“It isn’t the library’s, it’s mine!” said Harry hastily, 
snatching his copy of Advanced Potion-Making off the 
table as she lunged at it with a clawlike hand. 

“Despoiled!” she hissed. “Desecrated! Befouled!” 

“It’s just a book that’s been written on!” said Harry, 
tugging it out of her grip. 

She looked as though she might have a seizure; 
Hermione, who had hastily packed her things, 
grabbed Harry by the arm and frogmarched him 
away. 

“She’ll ban you from the library if you’re not careful. 
Why did you have to bring that stupid book?” 

“It’s not my fault she’s barking mad, Hermione. Or 
d’you think she overheard you being rude about 
Filch? I’ve always thought there might be something 
going on between them. ...” 

Page | 345 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh, ha ha ...” 



Enjoying the fact that they could speak normally 
again, they made their way along the deserted, lamp- 
lit corridors back to the common room, arguing about 
whether or not Filch and Madam Pince were secretly 
in love with each other. 

“Baubles,” said Harry to the Fat Lady, this being the 
new, festive password. 

“Same to you,” said the Fat Lady with a roguish grin, 
and she swung forward to admit them. 

“Hi, Harry!” said Romilda Vane, the moment he had 
climbed through the portrait hole. “Fancy a 
gillywater?” 

Hermione gave him a “what-did-I-tell-you?” look over 
her shoulder. 

“No thanks,” said Harry quickly. “I don’t like it much.” 

“Well, take these anyway,” said Romilda, thrusting a 
box into his hands. “Chocolate Cauldrons, they’ve got 
firewhisky in them. My gran sent them to me, but I 
don’t like them.” 

“Oh — right — thanks a lot,” said Harry, who could 
not think what else to say. “Er — I’m just going over 
here with ...” 

He hurried off behind Hermione, his voice tailing 
away feebly. 

“Told you,” said Hermione succinctly. “Sooner you ask 
someone, sooner they’ll all leave you alone and you 
can — ” 



Page | 346 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




But her face suddenly turned blank; she had just 
spotted Ron and Lavender, who were entwined in the 
same armchair. 

“Well, good night, Harry,” said Hermione, though it 
was only seven o’clock in the evening, and she left for 
the girls’ dormitory without another word. 

Harry went to bed comforting himself that there was 
only one more day of lessons to struggle through, 
plus Slughorn’s party, after which he and Ron would 
depart together for the Burrow. It now seemed 
impossible that Ron and Hermione would make up 
with each other before the holidays began, but 
perhaps, somehow, the break would give them time to 
calm down, think better of their behavior. . . . 

But his hopes were not high, and they sank still lower 
after enduring a Transfiguration lesson with them 
both next day. They had just embarked upon the 
immensely difficult topic of human Transfiguration; 
working in front of mirrors, they were supposed to be 
changing the color of their own eyebrows. Hermione 
laughed unkindly at Ron’s disastrous first attempt, 
during which he somehow managed to give himself a 
spectacular handlebar mustache; Ron retaliated by 
doing a cruel but accurate impression of Hermione 
jumping up and down in her seat every time Professor 
McGonagall asked a question, which Lavender and 
Parvati found deeply amusing and which reduced 
Hermione to the verge of tears again. She raced out of 
the classroom on the bell, leaving half her things 
behind; Harry, deciding that her need was greater 
than Ron’s just now, scooped up her remaining 
possessions and followed her. 

He finally tracked her down as she emerged from a 
girls’ bathroom on the floor below. She was 



Page | 347 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




accompanied by Luna Lovegood, who was patting her 
vaguely on the back. 

“Oh, hello, Harry,” said Luna. “Did you know one of 
your eyebrows is bright yellow?” 

“Hi, Luna. Hermione, you left your stuff. ...” 

He held out her books. 

“Oh yes,” said Hermione in a choked voice, taking her 
things and turning away quickly to hide the fact that 
she was wiping her eyes on her pencil case. “Thank 
you, Harry. Well, I’d better get going. ...” 

And she hurried off, without giving Harry any time to 
offer words of comfort, though admittedly he could 
not think of any. 

“She’s a bit upset,” said Luna. “I thought at first it 
was Moaning Myrtle in there, but it turned out to be 
Hermione. She said something about that Ron 
Weasley. ...” 

“Yeah, they’ve had a row,” said Harry. 

“He says very funny things sometimes, doesn’t he?” 
said Luna, as they set off down the corridor together. 
“But he can be a bit unkind. I noticed that last year.” 

“I s’pose,” said Harry. Luna was demonstrating her 
usual knack of speaking uncomfortable truths; he 
had never met anyone quite like her. “So have you 
had a good term?” 

“Oh, it’s been all right,” said Luna. “A bit lonely 
without the D.A. Ginny’s been nice, though. She 
stopped two boys in our Transfiguration class calling 
me ‘Loony’ the other day — ” 

Page | 348 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“How would you like to come to Slughorn’s party with 
me tonight?” 

The words were out of Harry’s mouth before he could 
stop them; he heard himself say them as though it 
were a stranger speaking. 

Luna turned her protuberant eyes upon him in 
surprise. 

“Slughorn’s party? With you?” 

“Yeah,” said Harry. “We’re supposed to bring guests, 
so I thought you might like ... I mean ...” He was keen 
to make his intentions perfectly clear. “I mean, just as 
friends, you know. But if you don’t want to ...” 

He was already half hoping that she didn’t want to. 

“Oh, no, I’d love to go with you as friends!” said Luna, 
beaming as he had never seen her beam before. 
“Nobody’s ever asked me to a party before, as a friend! 
Is that why you dyed your eyebrow, for the party? 
Should I do mine too?” 

“No,” said Harry firmly, “that was a mistake. I’ll get 
Hermione to put it right for me. So, I’ll meet you in 
the entrance hall at eight o’clock then.” 

“AHA!” screamed a voice from overhead and both of 
them jumped; unnoticed by either of them, they had 
just passed right underneath Peeves, who was 
hanging upside down from a chandelier and grinning 
maliciously at them. 

“ Potty asked Loony to go to the partyl Potty lurves 
Loony ! Potty luuuuurves LooooooonyV’ 



Page | 349 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




And he zoomed away, cackling and shrieking, “Potty 
loves Loony!” 

“Nice to keep these things private,” said Harry. And 
sure enough, in no time at all the whole school 
seemed to know that Harry Potter was taking Luna 
Lovegood to Slughorn’s party. 

“You could’ve taken anyonel” said Ron in disbelief 
over dinner. “Anyonel And you chose Loony 
Lovegood?” 

“Don’t call her that, Ron,” snapped Ginny, pausing 
behind Harry on her way to join friends. “I’m really 
glad you’re taking her, Harry, she’s so excited.” 

And she moved on down the table to sit with Dean. 
Harry tried to feel pleased that Ginny was glad he was 
taking Luna to the party, but could not quite manage 
it. A long way along the table, Hermione was sitting 
alone, playing with her stew. Harry noticed Ron 
looking at her furtively. 

“You could say sorry,” suggested Harry bluntly. 

“What, and get attacked by another flock of 
canaries?” muttered Ron. 

“What did you have to imitate her for?” 

“She laughed at my mustache!” 

“So did I, it was the stupidest thing I’ve ever seen.” 

But Ron did not seem to have heard; Lavender had 
just arrived with Parvati. Squeezing herself in 
between Harry and Ron, Lavender flung her arms 
around Ron’s neck. 



Page | 350 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Hi, Harry,” said Parvati who, like him, looked faintly 
embarrassed and bored by the behavior of their two 
friends. 

“Hi,” said Harry. “How’re you? You’re staying at 
Hogwarts, then? I heard your parents wanted you to 
leave.” 

“I managed to talk them out of it for the time being,” 
said Parvati. “That Katie thing really freaked them 
out, but as there hasn’t been anything since ... Oh, 
hi, Hermione!” 

Parvati positively beamed. Harry could tell that she 
was feeling guilty for having laughed at Hermione in 
Transfiguration. He looked around and saw that 
Hermione was beaming back, if possible even more 
brightly. Girls were very strange sometimes. 

“Hi, Parvati!” said Hermione, ignoring Ron and 
Lavender completely. “Are you going to Slughorn’s 
party tonight?” 

“No invite,” said Parvati gloomily. “I’d love to go, 
though, it sounds like it’s going to be really good. ... 
You’re going, aren’t you?” 

“Yes, I’m meeting Cormac at eight, and we’re — ” 

There was a noise like a plunger being withdrawn 
from a blocked sink and Ron surfaced. Hermione 
acted as though she had not seen or heard anything. 

“ — we’re going up to the party together.” 

“Cormac?” said Parvati. “Cormac McLaggen, you 
mean?” 



Page | 351 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“That’s right,” said Hermione sweetly. “The one who 
almost ’ — she put a great deal of emphasis on the 
word — “became Gryffindor Keeper.” 

“Are you going out with him, then?” asked Parvati, 
wide-eyed. 

“Oh — yes — didn’t you know?” said Hermione, with a 
most un-Hermione-ish giggle. 

“No!” said Parvati, looking positively agog at this piece 
of gossip. “Wow, you like your Quidditch players, 
don’t you? First Krum, then McLaggen ...” 

“I like really good Quidditch players,” Hermione 
corrected her, still smiling. “Well, see you ... Got to go 
and get ready for the party. ...” 

She left. At once Lavender and Parvati put their heads 
together to discuss this new development, with 
everything they had ever heard about McLaggen, and 
all they had ever guessed about Hermione. Ron 
looked strangely blank and said nothing. Harry was 
left to ponder in silence the depths to which girls 
would sink to get revenge. 

When he arrived in the entrance hall at eight o’clock 
that night, he found an unusually large number of 
girls lurking there, all of whom seemed to be staring 
at him resentfully as he approached Luna. She was 
wearing a set of spangled silver robes that were 
attracting a certain amount of giggles from the 
onlookers, but otherwise she looked quite nice. Harry 
was glad, in any case, that she had left off her radish 
earrings, her butterbeer cork necklace, and her 
Spectrespecs. 

“Hi,” he said. “Shall we get going then?” 



Page | 352 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh yes,” she said happily. “Where is the party?” 



“Slughorn’s office,” said Harry, leading her up the 
marble staircase away from all the staring and 
muttering. “Did you hear, there’s supposed to be a 
vampire coming?” 

“Rufus Scrimgeour?” asked Luna. 

“I — what?” said Harry, disconcerted. “You mean the 
Minister of Magic?” 

“Yes, he’s a vampire,” said Luna matter-of-factly. 
“Father wrote a very long article about it when 
Scrimgeour first took over from Cornelius Fudge, but 
he was forced not to publish by somebody from the 
Ministry. Obviously, they didn’t want the truth to get 
out!” 

Harry, who thought it most unlikely that Rufus 
Scrimgeour was a vampire, but who was used to Luna 
repeating her father’s bizarre views as though they 
were fact, did not reply; they were already 
approaching Slughorn’s office and the sounds of 
laughter, music, and loud conversation were growing 
louder with every step they took. 

Whether it had been built that way, or because he 
had used magical trickery to make it so, Slughorn’s 
office was much larger than the usual teacher’s 
study. The ceiling and walls had been draped with 
emerald, crimson, and gold hangings, so that it 
looked as though they were all inside a vast tent. The 
room was crowded and stuffy and bathed in the red 
light cast by an ornate golden lamp dangling from the 
center of the ceiling in which real fairies were 
fluttering, each a brilliant speck of light. Loud singing 
accompanied by what sounded like mandolins issued 
from a distant corner; a haze of pipe smoke hung over 
Page | 353 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




several elderly warlocks deep in conversation, and a 
number of house-elves were negotiating their way 
squeakily through the forest of knees, obscured by 
the heavy silver platters of food they were bearing, so 
that they looked like little roving tables. 

“Harry, m’boy!” boomed Slughorn, almost as soon as 
Harry and Luna had squeezed in through the door. 
“Come in, come in, so many people I’d like you to 
meet!” 

Slughorn was wearing a tasseled velvet hat to match 
his smoking jacket. Gripping Harry’s arm so tightly he 
might have been hoping to Disapparate with him, 
Slughorn led him purposefully into the party; Harry 
seized Luna’s hand and dragged her along with him. 

“Harry, I’d like you to meet Eldred Worple, an old 
student of mine, author of Blood Brothers: My Life 
Amongst the Vampires — and, of course, his friend 
Sanguini.” 

Worple, who was a small, stout, bespectacled man, 
grabbed Harry’s hand and shook it enthusiastically; 
the vampire Sanguini, who was tall and emaciated 
with dark shadows under his eyes, merely nodded. He 
looked rather bored. A gaggle of girls was standing 
close to him, looking curious and excited. 

“Harry Potter, I am simply delighted!” said Worple, 
peering shortsightedly up into Harry’s face. “I was 
saying to Professor Slughorn only the other day, 
‘Where is the biography of Harry Potter for which we 
have all been waiting?’ ” 

“Er,” said Harry, “were you?” 

“Just as modest as Horace described!” said Worple. 
“But seriously” — his manner changed; it became 

Page | 354 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




suddenly businesslike — “I would be delighted to 
write it myself — people are craving to know more 
about you, dear boy, craving! If you were prepared to 
grant me a few interviews, say in four- or five-hour 
sessions, why, we could have the book finished within 
months. And all with very little effort on your part, I 
assure you — ask Sanguini here if it isn’t quite — 
Sanguini, stay here\” added Worple, suddenly stern, 
for the vampire had been edging toward the nearby 
group of girls, a rather hungry look in his eye. “Here, 
have a pasty,” said Worple, seizing one from a passing 
elf and stuffing it into Sanguini’s hand before turning 
his attention back to Harry. 

“My dear boy, the gold you could make, you have no 
idea — ” 

“I’m definitely not interested,” said Harry firmly, “and 
I’ve just seen a friend of mine, sorry.” 

He pulled Luna after him into the crowd; he had 
indeed just seen a long mane of brown hair disappear 
between what looked like two members of the Weird 
Sisters. 

“Hermione! HermioneV’ 

“Harry! There you are, thank goodness! Hi, Luna!” 

“What’s happened to you?” asked Harry, for Hermione 
looked distinctly disheveled, rather as though she had 
just fought her way out of a thicket of Devil’s Snare. 

“Oh, I’ve just escaped — I mean, I’ve just left 
Cormac,” she said. “Under the mistletoe,” she added 
in explanation, as Harry continued to look 
questioningly at her. 



Page | 355 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Serves you right for coming with him,” he told her 
severely. 



“I thought he’d annoy Ron most,” said Hermione 
dispassionately. “I debated for a while about 
Zacharias Smith, but I thought, on the whole — ” 

“ You considered Smith?” said Harry, revolted. 

“Yes, I did, and I’m starting to wish I’d chosen him, 
McLaggen makes Grawp look a gentleman. Let’s go 
this way, we’ll be able to see him coming, he’s so tall. 



The three of them made their way over to the other 
side of the room, scooping up goblets of mead on the 
way, realizing too late that Professor Trelawney was 
standing there alone. 

“Hello,” said Luna politely to Professor Trelawney. 

“Good evening, my dear,” said Professor Trelawney, 
focusing upon Luna with some difficulty. Harry could 
smell cooking sherry again. “I haven’t seen you in my 
classes lately. ...” 

“No, I’ve got Firenze this year,” said Luna. 

“Oh, of course,” said Professor Trelawney with an 
angry, drunken titter. “Or Dobbin, as I prefer to think 
of him. You would have thought, would you not, that 
now I am returned to the school Professor 
Dumbledore might have got rid of the horse? But no 
... we share classes. ... It’s an insult, frankly, an 
insult. Do you know ...” 

Professor Trelawney seemed too tipsy to have 
recognized Harry. Under cover of her furious 
criticisms of Firenze, Harry drew closer to Hermione 

Page | 356 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




and said, “Let’s get something straight. Are you 
planning to tell Ron that you interfered at Keeper 
tryouts?” 

Hermione raised her eyebrows. “Do you really think 
I’d stoop that low?” 

Harry looked at her shrewdly. “Hermione, if you can 
ask out McLaggen — ” 

“There’s a difference,” said Hermione with dignity. 

“I’ve got no plans to tell Ron anything about what 
might, or might not, have happened at Keeper 
tryouts.” 

“Good,” said Harry fervently. “Because he’ll just fall 
apart again, and we’ll lose the next match — ” 

“Quidditch!” said Hermione angrily. “Is that all boys 
care about? Cormac hasn’t asked me one single 
question about myself, no, I’ve just been treated to ‘A 
Hundred Great Saves Made by Cormac McLaggen’ 
nonstop ever since — oh no, here he comes!” 

She moved so fast it was as though she had 
Disapparated; one moment she was there, the next, 
she had squeezed between two guffawing witches and 
vanished. 

“Seen Hermione?” asked McLaggen, forcing his way 
through the throng a minute later. 

“No, sorry,” said Harry, and he turned quickly to join 
in Luna’s conversation, forgetting for a split second to 
whom she was talking. 

“Harry Potter!” said Professor Trelawney in deep, 
vibrant tones, noticing him for the first time. 



Page | 357 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh, hello,” said Harry unenthusiastically. 



“My dear boy!” she said in a very carrying whisper. 
“The rumors! The stories! The Chosen One’! Of 
course, I have known for a very long time. ... The 
omens were never good, Harry. . . . But why have you 
not returned to Divination? For you, of all people, the 
subject is of the utmost importance!” 

“Ah, Sybill, we all think our subject’s most 
important!” said a loud voice, and Slughorn appeared 
at Professor Trelawney’s other side, his face very red, 
his velvet hat a little askew, a glass of mead in one 
hand and an enormous mince pie in the other. “But I 
don’t think I’ve ever known such a natural at 
Potions!” said Slughorn, regarding Harry with a fond, 
if bloodshot, eye. “Instinctive, you know — like his 
mother! I’ve only ever taught a few with this kind of 
ability, I can tell you that, Sybill — why even Severus 



And to Harry’s horror, Slughorn threw out an arm 
and seemed to scoop Snape out of thin air toward 
them. 

“Stop skulking and come and join us, Severus!” 
hiccuped Slughorn happily. “I was just talking about 
Harry’s exceptional potion-making! Some credit must 
go to you, of course, you taught him for five years!” 

Trapped, with Slughorn’s arm around his shoulders, 
Snape looked down his hooked nose at Harry, his 
black eyes narrowed. 

“Funny, I never had the impression that I managed to 
teach Potter anything at all.” 

“Well, then, it’s natural ability!” shouted Slughorn. 
“You should have seen what he gave me, first lesson, 

Page | 358 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Draught of Living Death — never had a student 
produce finer on a first attempt, I don’t think even 
you, Severus — ” 

“Really?” said Snape quietly, his eyes still boring into 
Harry, who felt a certain disquiet. The last thing he 
wanted was for Snape to start investigating the 
source of his newfound brilliance at Potions. 

“Remind me what other subjects you’re taking, 

Harry?” asked Slughorn. 

“Defense Against the Dark Arts, Charms, 
Transfiguration, Herbology ...” 

“All the subjects required, in short, for an Auror,” said 
Snape, with the faintest sneer. 

“Yeah, well, that’s what I’d like to do,” said Harry 
defiantly. 

“And a great one you’ll make too!” boomed Slughorn. 

“I don’t think you should be an Auror, Harry,” said 
Luna unexpectedly. Everybody looked at her. “The 
Aurors are part of the Rotfang Conspiracy, I thought 
everyone knew that. They’re working to bring down 
the Ministry of Magic from within using a 
combination of Dark Magic and gum disease.” 

Harry inhaled half his mead up his nose as he started 
to laugh. Really, it had been worth bringing Luna just 
for this. Emerging from his goblet, coughing, sopping 
wet but still grinning, he saw something calculated to 
raise his spirits even higher: Draco Malfoy being 
dragged by the ear toward them by Argus Filch. 

“Professor Slughorn,” wheezed Filch, his jowls aquiver 
and the maniacal light of mischief-detection in his 

Page | 359 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




bulging eyes, “I discovered this boy lurking in an 
upstairs corridor. He claims to have been invited to 
your party and to have been delayed in setting out. 

Did you issue him with an invitation?” 

Malfoy pulled himself free of Filch ’s grip, looking 
furious. 

“All right, I wasn’t invited!” he said angrily. “I was 
trying to gatecrash, happy?” 

“No, I’m not!” said Filch, a statement at complete odds 
with the glee on his face. “You’re in trouble, you are! 
Didn’t the headmaster say that nighttime prowling’s 
out, unless you’ve got permission, didn’t he, eh?” 

“That’s all right, Argus, that’s all right,” said 
Slughorn, waving a hand. “It’s Christmas, and it’s not 
a crime to want to come to a party. Just this once, 
we’ll forget any punishment; you may stay, Draco.” 

Filch ’s expression of outraged disappointment was 
perfectly predictable; but why, Harry wondered, 
watching him, did Malfoy look almost equally 
unhappy? And why was Snape looking at Malfoy as 
though both angry and . . . was it possible? ... a little 
afraid? 

But almost before Harry had registered what he had 
seen, Filch had turned and shuffled away, muttering 
under his breath; Malfoy had composed his face into 
a smile and was thanking Slughorn for his generosity, 
and Snape’s face was smoothly inscrutable again. 

“It’s nothing, nothing,” said Slughorn, waving away 
Malfoy ’s thanks. “I did know your grandfather, after 
all. ...” 



Page | 360 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“He always spoke very highly of you, sir,” said Malfoy 
quickly. “Said you were the best potion-maker he’d 
ever known. ...” 

Harry stared at Malfoy. It was not the sucking-up that 
intrigued him; he had watched Malfoy do that to 
Snape for a long time. It was the fact that Malfoy did, 
after all, look a little ill. This was the first time he had 
seen Malfoy close up for ages; he now saw that Malfoy 
had dark shadows under his eyes and a distinctly 
grayish tinge to his skin. 

“I’d like a word with you, Draco,” said Snape 
suddenly. 

“Oh, now, Severus,” said Slughorn, hiccuping again, 
“it’s Christmas, don’t be too hard — ” 

“I’m his Head of House, and I shall decide how hard, 
or otherwise, to be,” said Snape curtly. “Follow me, 
Draco.” 

They left, Snape leading the way, Malfoy looking 
resentful. Harry stood there for a moment, irresolute, 
then said, “I’ll be back in a bit, Luna — er — 
bathroom.” 

“All right,” she said cheerfully, and he thought he 
heard her, as he hurried off into the crowd, resume 
the subject of the Rotfang Conspiracy with Professor 
Trelawney, who seemed sincerely interested. 

It was easy, once out of the party, to pull his 
Invisibility Cloak out of his pocket and throw it over 
himself, for the corridor was quite deserted. What was 
more difficult was finding Snape and Malfoy. Harry 
ran down the corridor, the noise of his feet masked by 
the music and loud talk still issuing from Slughorn ’s 
office behind him. Perhaps Snape had taken Malfoy to 
Page | 361 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




his office in the dungeons ... or perhaps he was 
escorting him back to the Slytherin common room. ... 
Harry pressed his ear against door after door as he 
dashed down the corridor until, with a great jolt of 
excitement, he crouched down to the keyhole of the 
last classroom in the corridor and heard voices. 

"... cannot afford mistakes, Draco, because if you are 
expelled — ” 

“I didn’t have anything to do with it, all right?” 

“I hope you are telling the truth, because it was both 
clumsy and foolish. Already you are suspected of 
having a hand in it.” 

“Who suspects me?” said Malfoy angrily. “For the last 
time, I didn’t do it, okay? That Bell girl must’ve had 
an enemy no one knows about — don’t look at me like 
that! I know what you’re doing, I’m not stupid, but it 
won’t work — I can stop you!” 

There was a pause and then Snape said quietly, “Ah 
. . . Aunt Bellatrix has been teaching you Occlumency, 

I see. What thoughts are you trying to conceal from 
your master, Draco?” 

“I’m not trying to conceal anything from him, I just 
don’t want you butting in!” 

Harry pressed his ear still more closely against the 
keyhole. ... What had happened to make Malfoy speak 
to Snape like this — Snape, toward whom he had 
always shown respect, even liking? 

“So that is why you have been avoiding me this term? 
You have feared my interference? You realize that, 
had anybody else failed to come to my office when I 
had told them repeatedly to be there, Draco — ” 

Page | 362 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“So put me in detention! Report me to Dumbledore!” 
jeered Malfoy. 

There was another pause. Then Snape said, “You 
know perfectly well that I do not wish to do either of 
those things.” 

“You’d better stop telling me to come to your office 
then!” 

“Listen to me,” said Snape, his voice so low now that 
Harry had to push his ear very hard against the 
keyhole to hear. “I am trying to help you. I swore to 
your mother I would protect you. I made the 
Unbreakable Vow, Draco — ” 

“Looks like you 11 have to break it, then, because I 
don’t need your protection! It’s my job, he gave it to 
me and I’m doing it, I’ve got a plan and it’s going to 
work, it’s just taking a bit longer than I thought it 
would!” 

“What is your plan?” 

“It’s none of your business!” 

“If you tell me what you are trying to do, I can assist 
you — ” 

“I’ve got all the assistance I need, thanks, I’m not 
alone!” 

“You were certainly alone tonight, which was foolish 
in the extreme, wandering the corridors without 
lookouts or backup, these are elementary mistakes — 



“I would’ve had Crabbe and Goyle with me if you 
hadn’t put them in detention!” 

Page | 363 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Keep your voice down!” spat Snape, for Malfoy’s voice 
had risen excitedly. “If your friends Crabbe and Goyle 
intend to pass their Defense Against the Dark Arts 
O.W.L. this time around, they will need to work a 
little harder than they are doing at pres — ” 

“What does it matter?” said Malfoy. “Defense Against 
the Dark Arts — it’s all just a joke, isn’t it, an act? 
Like any of us need protecting against the Dark Arts 



“It is an act that is crucial to success, Draco!” said 
Snape. “Where do you think I would have been all 
these years, if I had not known how to act? Now listen 
to me! You are being incautious, wandering around at 
night, getting yourself caught, and if you are placing 
your reliance in assistants like Crabbe and Goyle — ” 

“They’re not the only ones, I’ve got other people on my 
side, better people!” 

“Then why not confide in me, and I can — ” 

“I know what you’re up to! You want to steal my 
glory!” 

There was another pause, then Snape said coldly, 
“You are speaking like a child. I quite understand 
that your father’s capture and imprisonment has 
upset you, but — ” 

Harry had barely a second’s warning; he heard 
Malfoy’s footsteps on the other side of the door and 
flung himself out of the way just as it burst open; 
Malfoy was striding away down the corridor, past the 
open door of Slughorn’s office, around the distant 
corner, and out of sight. 



Page | 364 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Hardly daring to breathe, Harry remained crouched 
down as Snape emerged slowly from the classroom. 
His expression unfathomable, he returned to the 
party. Harry remained on the floor, hidden beneath 
the cloak, his mind racing. 



Page | 365 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






A VERY FROSTY CHRISTMAS 

“So Snape was offering to help him? He was definitely 
offering to help him?” 

“If you ask that once more,” said Harry, “I’m going to 
stick this sprout — ” 

“I’m only checking!” said Ron. They were standing 
alone at the Burrow’s kitchen sink, peeling a 
mountain of sprouts for Mrs. Weasley. Snow was 
drifting past the window in front of them. 

“Yes, Snape was offering to help himl” said Harry. “He 
said he’d promised Malfoy’s mother to protect him, 
that he’d made an Unbreakable Oath or something — 



“An Unbreakable Vow?” said Ron, looking stunned. 
“Nah, he can’t have. ... Are you sure?” 

“Yes, I’m sure,” said Harry. “Why, what does it 
mean?” 



Page | 366 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



“Well, you can’t break an Unbreakable Vow. ...” 

“I’d worked that much out for myself, funnily enough. 
What happens if you break it, then?” 

“You die,” said Ron simply. “Fred and George tried to 
get me to make one when I was about five. I nearly 
did too, I was holding hands with Fred and everything 
when Dad found us. He went mental,” said Ron, with 
a reminiscent gleam in his eyes. “Only time I’ve ever 
seen Dad as angry as Mum. Fred reckons his left 
buttock has never been the same since.” 

“Yeah, well, passing over Fred’s left buttock — ” 

“I beg your pardon?” said Fred’s voice as the twins 
entered the kitchen. 

“Aaah, George, look at this. They’re using knives and 
everything. Bless them.” 

“I’ll be seventeen in two and a bit months’ time,” said 
Ron grumpily, “and then I’ll be able to do it by magic!” 

“But meanwhile,” said George, sitting down at the 
kitchen table and putting his feet up on it, “we can 
enjoy watching you demonstrate the correct use of a 
— whoops-a-daisy!” 

“You made me do that!” said Ron angrily, sucking his 
cut thumb. “You wait, when I’m seventeen — ” 

“I’m sure you’ll dazzle us all with hitherto 
unsuspected magical skills,” yawned Fred. 

“And speaking of hitherto unsuspected skills, 

Ronald,” said George, “what is this we hear from 
Ginny about you and a young lady called — unless 
our information is faulty — Lavender Brown?” 

Page | 367 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Ron turned a little pink, but did not look displeased 
as he turned back to the sprouts. “Mind your own 
business.” 

“What a snappy retort,” said Fred. “I really don’t know 
how you think of them. No, what we wanted to know 
was . . . how did it happen?” 

“What d’you mean?” 

“Did she have an accident or something?” 

“What?” 

“Well, how did she sustain such extensive brain 
damage? Careful, now!” 

Mrs. Weasley entered the room just in time to see Ron 
throw the sprout knife at Fred, who had turned it into 
a paper airplane with one lazy flick of his wand. 

“Ronl” she said furiously. “Don’t you ever let me see 
you throwing knives again!” 

“I won’t,” said Ron, “let you see,” he added under his 
breath, as he turned back to the sprout mountain. 

“Fred, George, I’m sorry, dears, but Remus is arriving 
tonight, so Bill will have to squeeze in with you two.” 

“No problem,” said George. 

“Then, as Charlie isn’t coming home, that just leaves 
Harry and Ron in the attic, and if Fleur shares with 
Ginny — ” 

“ — that’ll make Ginny’s Christmas — ” muttered Fred. 



Page | 368 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“ — everyone should be comfortable. Well, they’ll have 
a bed, anyway,” said Mrs. Weasley, sounding slightly 
harassed. 



“Percy definitely not showing his ugly face, then?” 
asked Fred. 

Mrs. Weasley turned away before she answered. “No, 
he’s busy, I expect, at the Ministry.” 

“Or he’s the world’s biggest prat,” said Fred, as Mrs. 
Weasley left the kitchen. “One of the two. Well, let’s 
get going, then, George.” 

“What are you two up to?” asked Ron. “Can’t you help 
us with these sprouts? You could just use your wand 
and then well be free too!” 

“No, I don’t think we can do that,” said Fred seriously. 
“It’s very character-building stuff, learning to peel 
sprouts without magic, makes you appreciate how 
difficult it is for Muggles and Squibs — ” 

“ — and if you want people to help you, Ron,” added 
George, throwing the paper airplane at him, “I 
wouldn’t chuck knives at them. Just a little hint. 
We’re off to the village, there’s a very pretty girl 
working in the paper shop who thinks my card tricks 
are something marvelous ... almost like real magic. 



“Gits,” said Ron darkly, watching Fred and George 
setting off across the snowy yard. “Would’ve only 
taken them ten seconds and then we could’ve gone 
too.” 

“I couldn’t,” said Harry. “I promised Dumbledore I 
wouldn’t wander off while I’m staying here.” 

Page | 369 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh yeah,” said Ron. He peeled a few more sprouts 
and then said, “Are you going to tell Dumbledore what 
you heard Snape and Malfoy saying to each other?” 

“Yep,” said Harry. “I’m going to tell anyone who can 
put a stop to it, and Dumbledore’s top of the list. I 
might have another word with your dad too.” 

“Pity you didn’t hear what Malfoy’s actually doing, 
though.” 

“I couldn’t have done, could I? That was the whole 
point, he was refusing to tell Snape.” 

There was silence for a moment or two, then Ron 
said, “ ’Course, you know what they’ll all say? Dad 
and Dumbledore and all of them? They’ll say Snape 
isn’t really trying to help Malfoy, he was just trying to 
find out what Malfoy’s up to.” 

“They didn’t hear him,” said Harry flatly. “No one’s 
that good an actor, not even Snape.” 

“Yeah ... I’m just saying, though,” said Ron. 

Harry turned to face him, frowning. “You think I’m 
right, though?” 

“Yeah, I do!” said Ron hastily. “Seriously, I do! But 
they’re all convinced Snape’s in the Order, aren’t 
they?” 

Harry said nothing. It had already occurred to him 
that this would be the most likely objection to his new 
evidence; he could hear Hermione now: Obviously, 
Harry, he was pretending to offer help so he could trick 
Malfoy into telling him what he’s doing. ... 



Page | 370 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




This was pure imagination, however, as he had had 
no opportunity to tell Hermione what he had 
overheard. She had disappeared from Slughorn’s 
parry before he returned to it, or so he had been 
informed by an irate McLaggen, and she had already 
gone to bed by the time he returned to the common 
room. As he and Ron had left for the Burrow early the 
next day, he had barely had time to wish her a happy 
Christmas and to tell her that he had some very 
important news when they got back from the 
holidays. He was not entirely sure that she had heard 
him, though; Ron and Lavender had been saying a 
thoroughly nonverbal good-bye just behind him at the 
time. 

Still, even Hermione would not be able to deny one 
thing: Malfoy was definitely up to something, and 
Snape knew it, so Harry felt fully justified in saying “I 
told you so,” which he had done several times to Ron 
already. 

Harry did not get the chance to speak to Mr. Weasley, 
who was working very long hours at the Ministry, 
until Christmas Eve night. The Weasleys and their 
guests were sitting in the living room, which Ginny 
had decorated so lavishly that it was rather like 
sitting in a paper-chain explosion. Fred, George, 

Harry, and Ron were the only ones who knew that the 
angel on top of the tree was actually a garden gnome 
that had bitten Fred on the ankle as he pulled up 
carrots for Christmas dinner. Stupefied, painted gold, 
stuffed into a miniature tutu and with small wings 
glued to its back, it glowered down at them all, the 
ugliest angel Harry had ever seen, with a large bald 
head like a potato and rather hairy feet. 

They were all supposed to be listening to a Christmas 
broadcast by Mrs. Weasley’s favorite singer, Celestina 
Warbeck, whose voice was warbling out of the large 

Page | 371 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




wooden wireless set. Fleur, who seemed to find 
Celestina very dull, was talking so loudly in the 
corner that a scowling Mrs. Weasley kept pointing her 
wand at the volume control, so that Celestina grew 
louder and louder. Under cover of a particularly jazzy 
number called “A Cauldron Full of Hot, Strong Love,” 
Fred and George started a game of Exploding Snap 
with Ginny. Ron kept shooting Bill and Fleur covert 
looks, as though hoping to pick up tips. Meanwhile, 
Remus Lupin, who was thinner and more ragged- 
looking than ever, was sitting beside the fire, staring 
into its depths as though he could not hear 
Celestina’s voice. 

Oh, come and stir my cauldron, 

And if you do it right, 

I’ll boil you up some hot strong love 
To keep you warm tonight. 

“We danced to this when we were eighteen!” said Mrs. 
Weasley, wiping her eyes on her knitting. “Do you 
remember, Arthur?” 

“Mphf?” said Mr. Weasley, whose head had been 
nodding over the satsuma he was peeling. “Oh yes . . . 
marvelous tune ...” 

With an effort, he sat up a little straighter and looked 
around at Harry, who was sitting next to him. 

“Sorry about this,” he said, jerking his head toward 
the wireless as Celestina broke into the chorus. “Be 
over soon.” 

“No problem,” said Harry, grinning. “Has it been busy 
at the Ministry?” 

“Very,” said Mr. Weasley. “I wouldn’t mind if we were 
getting anywhere, but of the three arrests we’ve made 

Page | 372 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




in the last couple of months, I doubt that one of them 
is a genuine Death Eater — only don’t repeat that, 
Harry,” he added quickly, looking much more awake 
all of a sudden. 

“They’re not still holding Stan Shunpike, are they?” 
asked Harry. 

“I’m afraid so,” said Mr. Weasley. “I know 
Dumbledore’s tried appealing directly to Scrimgeour 
about Stan. ... I mean, anybody who has actually 
interviewed him agrees that he’s about as much a 
Death Eater as this satsuma . . . but the top levels 
want to look as though they’re making some progress, 
and ‘three arrests’ sounds better than ‘three mistaken 
arrests and releases’... but again, this is all top 
secret. ...” 

“I won’t say anything,” said Harry. He hesitated for a 
moment, wondering how best to embark on what he 
wanted to say; as he marshaled his thoughts, 
Celestina Warbeck began a ballad called “You 
Charmed the Heart Right Out of Me.” 

“Mr. Weasley, you know what I told you at the station 
when we were setting off for school?” 

“I checked, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley at once. “I went 
and searched the Malfoys’ house. There was nothing, 
either broken or whole, that shouldn’t have been 
there.” 

“Yeah, I know, I saw in the Prophet that you’d looked 
... but this is something different. ... Well, something 
more ...” 

And he told Mr. Weasley everything he had overheard 
between Malfoy and Snape. As Harry spoke, he saw 
Lupin’s head turn a little toward him, taking in every 

Page | 373 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




word. When he had finished, there was silence, except 
for Celestina’s crooning. 

Oh, my poor heart, where has it gone? 

It’s left me for a spell . . . 

“Has it occurred to you, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley, 
“that Snape was simply pretending — ?” 

“Pretending to offer help, so that he could find out 
what Malfoy’s up to?” said Harry quickly. “Yeah, I 
thought you’d say that. But how do we know?” 

“It isn’t our business to know,” said Lupin 
unexpectedly. He had turned his back on the fire now 
and faced Harry across Mr. Weasley. “It’s 
Dumbledore’s business. Dumbledore trusts Severus, 
and that ought to be good enough for all of us.” 

“But,” said Harry, “just say — just say Dumbledore’s 
wrong about Snape — ” 

“People have said it, many times. It comes down to 
whether or not you trust Dumbledore’s judgment. I 
do; therefore, I trust Severus.” 

“But Dumbledore can make mistakes,” argued Harry. 
“He says it himself. And you” — he looked Lupin 
straight in the eye — “do you honestly like Snape?” 

“I neither like nor dislike Severus,” said Lupin. “No, 
Harry, I am speaking the truth,” he added, as Harry 
pulled a skeptical expression. “We shall never be 
bosom friends, perhaps; after all that happened 
between James and Sirius and Severus, there is too 
much bitterness there. But I do not forget that during 
the year I taught at Hogwarts, Severus made the 
Wolfsbane Potion for me every month, made it 
Page | 374 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




perfectly, so that I did not have to suffer as I usually 
do at the full moon.” 

“But he ‘accidentally’ let it slip that you’re a werewolf, 
so you had to leave!” said Harry angrily. 

Lupin shrugged. “The news would have leaked out 
anyway. We both know he wanted my job, but he 
could have wreaked much worse damage on me by 
tampering with the potion. He kept me healthy. I 
must be grateful.” 

“Maybe he didn’t dare mess with the potion with 
Dumbledore watching him!” said Harry. 

“You are determined to hate him, Harry,” said Lupin 
with a faint smile. “And I understand; with James as 
your father, with Sirius as your godfather, you have 
inherited an old prejudice. By all means tell 
Dumbledore what you have told Arthur and me, but 
do not expect him to share your view of the matter; do 
not even expect him to be surprised by what you tell 
him. It might have been on Dumbledore’s orders that 
Severus questioned Draco.” 

... and now you’ve torn it quite apart 

I’ll thank you to give back my heart! 

Celestina ended her song on a very long, high-pitched 
note and loud applause issued out of the wireless, 
which Mrs. Weasley joined in with enthusiastically. 

“Eez eet over?” said Fleur loudly. “Thank goodness, 
what an ’orrible — ” 

“Shall we have a nightcap, then?” asked Mr. Weasley 
loudly, leaping to his feet. “Who wants eggnog?” 



Page | 375 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“What have you been up to lately?” Harry asked 
Lupin, as Mr. Weasley bustled off to fetch the eggnog, 
and everybody else stretched and broke into 
conversation. 

“Oh, I’ve been underground,” said Lupin. “Almost 
literally. That’s why I haven’t been able to write, 

Harry; sending letters to you would have been 
something of a giveaway.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“I’ve been living among my fellows, my equals,” said 
Lupin. “Werewolves,” he added, at Harry’s look of 
incomprehension. “Nearly all of them are on 
Voldemort’s side. Dumbledore wanted a spy and here 
I was ... ready-made.” 

He sounded a little bitter, and perhaps realized it, for 
he smiled more warmly as he went on, “I am not 
complaining; it is necessary work and who can do it 
better than I? However, it has been difficult gaining 
their trust. I bear the unmistakable signs of having 
tried to live among wizards, you see, whereas they 
have shunned normal society and live on the margins, 
stealing — and sometimes killing — to eat.” 

“How come they like Voldemort?” 

“They think that, under his rule, they will have a 
better life,” said Lupin. “And it is hard to argue with 
Grey back out there. ...” 

“Who’s Grey back?” 

“You haven’t heard of him?” Lupin’s hands closed 
convulsively in his lap. “Fenrir Greyback is, perhaps, 
the most savage werewolf alive today. He regards it as 
his mission in life to bite and to contaminate as many 

Page | 376 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




people as possible; he wants to create enough 
werewolves to overcome the wizards. Voldemort has 
promised him prey in return for his services. 

Greyback specializes in children. ... Bite them young, 
he says, and raise them away from their parents, 
raise them to hate normal wizards. Voldemort has 
threatened to unleash him upon people’s sons and 
daughters; it is a threat that usually produces good 
results.” 

Lupin paused and then said, “It was Greyback who 
bit me.” 

“What?” said Harry, astonished. “When — when you 
were a kid, you mean?” 

“Yes. My father had offended him. I did not know, for 
a very long time, the identity of the werewolf who had 
attacked me; I even felt pity for him, thinking that he 
had had no control, knowing by then how it felt to 
transform. But Greyback is not like that. At the full 
moon, he positions himself close to victims, ensuring 
that he is near enough to strike. He plans it all. And 
this is the man Voldemort is using to marshal the 
werewolves. I cannot pretend that my particular 
brand of reasoned argument is making much 
headway against Greyback’s insistence that we 
werewolves deserve blood, that we ought to revenge 
ourselves on normal people.” 

“But you are normal!” said Harry fiercely. “You’ve just 
got a — a problem — ” 

Lupin burst out laughing. “Sometimes you remind me 
a lot of James. He called it my ‘furry little problem’ in 
company. Many people were under the impression 
that I owned a badly behaved rabbit.” 



Page | 377 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




He accepted a glass of eggnog from Mr. Weasley with 
a word of thanks, looking slightly more cheerful. 
Harry, meanwhile, felt a rush of excitement: This last 
mention of his father had reminded him that there 
was something he had been looking forward to asking 
Lupin. 

“Have you ever heard of someone called the Half- 
Blood Prince?” 

“The Half-Blood what?” 

“Prince,” said Harry, watching him closely for signs of 
recognition. 

“There are no Wizarding princes,” said Lupin, now 
smiling. “Is this a title you’re thinking of adopting? I 
should have thought being ‘the Chosen One’ would be 
enough.” 

“It’s nothing to do with me!” said Harry indignantly. 
“The Half-Blood Prince is someone who used to go to 
Hogwarts, I’ve got his old Potions book. He wrote 
spells all over it, spells he invented. One of them was 
Levicorpus — ” 

“Oh, that one had a great vogue during my time at 
Hogwarts,” said Lupin reminiscently. “There were a 
few months in my fifth year when you couldn’t move 
for being hoisted into the air by your ankle.” 

“My dad used it,” said Harry. “I saw him in the 
Pensieve, he used it on Snape.” 

He tried to sound casual, as though this was a 
throwaway comment of no real importance, but he 
was not sure he had achieved the right effect; Lupin’s 
smile was a little too understanding. 



Page | 378 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes,” he said, “but he wasn’t the only one. As I say, it 
was very popular. ... You know how these spells come 
and go. ...” 

“But it sounds like it was invented while you were at 
school,” Harry persisted. 

“Not necessarily,” said Lupin. “Jinxes go in and out of 
fashion like everything else.” 

He looked into Harry’s face and then said quietly, 
“James was a pureblood, Harry, and I promise you, 
he never asked us to call him ‘Prince.’ ” 

Abandoning pretense, Harry said, “And it wasn’t 
Sirius? Or you?” 

“Definitely not.” 

“Oh.” Harry stared into the fire. “I just thought — 
well, he’s helped me out a lot in Potions classes, the 
Prince has.” 

“How old is this book, Harry?” 

“I dunno, I’ve never checked.” 

“Well, perhaps that will give you some clue as to when 
the Prince was at Hogwarts,” said Lupin. 

Shortly after this, Fleur decided to imitate Celestina 
singing “A Cauldron Full of Hot, Strong Love,” which 
was taken by everyone, once they had glimpsed Mrs. 
Weasley’s expression, to be the cue to go to bed. 

Harry and Ron climbed all the way up to Ron’s attic 
bedroom, where a camp bed had been added for 
Harry. 



Page | 379 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Ron fell asleep almost immediately, but Harry delved 
into his trunk and pulled out his copy of Advanced 
Potion-Making before getting into bed. There he turned 
its pages, searching, until he finally found, at the 
front of the book, the date that it had been published. 
It was nearly fifty years old. Neither his father, nor his 
father’s friends, had been at Hogwarts fifty years ago. 
Feeling disappointed, Harry threw the book back into 
his trunk, turned off the lamp, and rolled over, 
thinking of werewolves and Snape, Stan Shunpike 
and the Half-Blood Prince, and finally falling into an 
uneasy sleep full of creeping shadows and the cries of 
bitten children. ... 

“She’s got to be joking. ...” 

Harry woke with a start to find a bulging stocking 
lying over the end of his bed. He put on his glasses 
and looked around; the tiny window was almost 
completely obscured with snow and, in front of it, Ron 
was sitting bolt upright in bed and examining what 
appeared to be a thick gold chain. 

“What’s that?” asked Harry. 

“It’s from Lavender,” said Ron, sounding revolted. 

“She can’t honestly think I’d wear ...” 

Harry looked more closely and let out a shout of 
laughter. Dangling from the chain in large gold letters 
were the words: 

My Sweetheart 

“Nice,” he said. “Classy. You should definitely wear it 
in front of Fred and George.” 



Page | 380 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“If you tell them,” said Ron, shoving the necklace out 
of sight under his pillow, “I — I — 111 — ” 

“Stutter at me?” said Harry, grinning. “Come on, 
would I?” 

“How could she think I’d like something like that, 
though?” Ron demanded of thin air, looking rather 
shocked. 

“Well, think back,” said Harry. “Have you ever let it 
slip that you’d like to go out in public with the words 
‘My Sweetheart’ round your neck?” 

“Well ... we don’t really talk much,” said Ron. “It’s 
mainly ...” 

“Snogging,” said Harry. 

“Well, yeah,” said Ron. He hesitated a moment, then 
said, “Is Hermione really going out with McLaggen?” 

“I dunno,” said Harry. “They were at Slughorn’s party 
together, but I don’t think it went that well.” 

Ron looked slightly more cheerful as he delved deeper 
into his stocking. 

Harry’s presents included a sweater with a large 
Golden Snitch worked onto the front, hand-knitted by 
Mrs. Weasley, a large box of Weasleys’ Wizard 
Wheezes products from the twins, and a slightly 
damp, moldy-smelling package that came with a label 
reading TO MASTER, FROM KREACHER. 

Harry stared at it. “D’you reckon this is safe to open?” 
he asked. 



Page | 381 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Can’t be anything dangerous, all our mail’s still 
being searched at the Ministry,” replied Ron, though 
he was eyeing the parcel suspiciously. 

“I didn’t think of giving Kreacher anything. Do people 
usually give their house-elves Christmas presents?” 
asked Harry, prodding the parcel cautiously. 

“Hermione would,” said Ron. “But let’s wait and see 
what it is before you start feeling guilty.” 

A moment later, Harry had given a loud yell and leapt 
out of his camp bed; the package contained a large 
number of maggots. 

“Nice,” said Ron, roaring with laughter. “Very 
thoughtful.” 

“I’d rather have them than that necklace,” said Harry, 
which sobered Ron up at once. 

Everybody was wearing new sweaters when they all 
sat down for Christmas lunch, everyone except Fleur 
(on whom, it appeared, Mrs. Weasley had not wanted 
to waste one) and Mrs. Weasley herself, who was 
sporting a brand-new midnight blue witch’s hat 
glittering with what looked like tiny starlike 
diamonds, and a spectacular golden necklace. 

“Fred and George gave them to me! Aren’t they 
beautiful?” 

“Well, we find we appreciate you more and more, 
Mum, now we’re washing our own socks,” said 
George, waving an airy hand. “Parsnips, Remus?” 

“Harry, you’ve got a maggot in your hair,” said Ginny 
cheerfully, leaning across the table to pick it out; 



Page | 382 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry felt goose bumps erupt up his neck that had 
nothing to do with the maggot. 

“ ’Ow ’orrible,” said Fleur, with an affected little 
shudder. 

“Yes, isn’t it?” said Ron. “Gravy, Fleur?” 

In his eagerness to help her, he knocked the gravy 
boat flying; Bill waved his wand and the gravy soared 
up in the air and returned meekly to the boat. 

“You are as bad as zat Tonks,” said Fleur to Ron, 
when she had finished kissing Bill in thanks. “She is 
always knocking — ” 

“I invited dear Tonks to come along today,” said Mrs. 
Weasley, setting down the carrots with unnecessary 
force and glaring at Fleur. “But she wouldn’t come. 
Have you spoken to her lately, Remus?” 

“No, I haven’t been in contact with anybody very 
much,” said Lupin. “But Tonks has got her own 
family to go to, hasn’t she?” 

“Hmmm,” said Mrs. Weasley. “Maybe. I got the 
impression she was planning to spend Christmas 
alone, actually.” 

She gave Lupin an annoyed look, as though it was all 
his fault she was getting Fleur for a daughter-in-law 
instead of Tonks, but Harry, glancing across at Fleur, 
who was now feeding Bill bits of turkey off her own 
fork, thought that Mrs. Weasley was fighting a long- 
lost battle. He was, however, reminded of a question 
he had with regard to Tonks, and who better to ask 
than Lupin, the man who knew all about Patronuses? 



Page | 383 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Tonks’s Patronus has changed its form,” he told him. 
“Snape said so anyway. I didn’t know that could 
happen. Why would your Patronus change?” 

Lupin took his time chewing his turkey and 
swallowing before saying slowly, “Sometimes ... a 
great shock ... an emotional upheaval ...” 

“It looked big, and it had four legs,” said Harry, 
struck by a sudden thought and lowering his voice. 
“Hey ... it couldn’t be — ?” 

“Arthur!” said Mrs. Weasley suddenly. She had risen 
from her chair; her hand was pressed over her heart 
and she was staring out of the kitchen window. 
“Arthur — it’s Percy!” 

“What?” 

Mr. Weasley looked around. Everybody looked quickly 
at the window; Ginny stood up for a better look. 

There, sure enough, was Percy Weasley, striding 
across the snowy yard, his horn-rimmed glasses 
glinting in the sunlight. He was not, however, alone. 

“Arthur, he’s — he’s with the Minister!” 

And sure enough, the man Harry had seen in the 
Daily Prophet was following along in Percy’s wake, 
limping slightly, his mane of graying hair and his 
black cloak flecked with snow. Before any of them 
could say anything, before Mr. and Mrs. Weasley 
could do more than exchange stunned looks, the back 
door opened and there stood Percy. 

There was a moment’s painful silence. Then Percy 
said rather stiffly, “Merry Christmas, Mother.” 



Page | 384 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh, Percy\” said Mrs. Weasley, and she threw herself 
into his arms. 



Rufus Scrimgeour paused in the doorway, leaning on 
his walking stick and smiling as he observed this 
affecting scene. 

“You must forgive this intrusion,” he said, when Mrs. 
Weasley looked around at him, beaming and wiping 
her eyes. “Percy and I were in the vicinity — working, 
you know — and he couldn’t resist dropping in and 
seeing you all.” 

But Percy showed no sign of wanting to greet any of 
the rest of the family. He stood, poker-straight and 
awkward-looking, and stared over everybody else’s 
heads. Mr. Weasley, Fred, and George were all 
observing him, stony-faced. 

“Please, come in, sit down, Minister!” fluttered Mrs. 
Weasley, straightening her hat. “Have a little purkey, 
or some tooding. ... I mean — ” 

“No, no, my dear Molly,” said Scrimgeour. Harry 
guessed that he had checked her name with Percy 
before they entered the house. “I don’t want to 
intrude, wouldn’t be here at all if Percy hadn’t wanted 
to see you all so badly. ...” 

“Oh, Perce!” said Mrs. Weasley tearfully, reaching up 
to kiss him. 

"... We’ve only looked in for five minutes, so I’ll have a 
stroll around the yard while you catch up with Percy. 
No, no, I assure you I don’t want to butt in! Well, if 
anybody cared to show me your charming garden . . . 
Ah, that young man’s finished, why doesn’t he take a 
stroll with me?” 

Page | 385 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




The atmosphere around the table changed 
perceptibly. Everybody looked from Scrimgeour to 
Harry. Nobody seemed to find Scrimgeour s pretense 
that he did not know Harry’s name convincing, or find 
it natural that he should be chosen to accompany the 
Minister around the garden when Ginny, Fleur, and 
George also had clean plates. 

“Yeah, all right,” said Harry into the silence. 

He was not fooled; for all Scrimgeour’s talk that they 
had just been in the area, that Percy wanted to look 
up his family, this must be the real reason that they 
had come, so that Scrimgeour could speak to Harry 
alone. 

“It’s fine,” he said quietly, as he passed Lupin, who 
had half risen from his chair. “Fine,” he added, as Mr. 
Weasley opened his mouth to speak. 

“Wonderful!” said Scrimgeour, standing back to let 
Harry pass through the door ahead of him. “We’ll just 
take a turn around the garden, and Percy and I’ll be 
off. Carry on, everyone!” 

Harry walked across the yard toward the Weasleys’ 
overgrown, snow-covered garden, Scrimgeour limping 
slightly at his side. He had, Harry knew, been Head of 
the Auror office; he looked tough and battle-scarred, 
very different from portly Fudge in his bowler hat. 

“Charming,” said Scrimgeour, stopping at the garden 
fence and looking out over the snowy lawn and the 
indistinguishable plants. “Charming.” 

Harry said nothing. He could tell that Scrimgeour was 
watching him. 



Page | 386 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I’ve wanted to meet you for a very long time,” said 
Scrimgeour, after a few moments. “Did you know 
that?” 

“No,” said Harry truthfully. 

“Oh yes, for a very long time. But Dumbledore has 
been very protective of you,” said Scrimgeour. 
“Natural, of course, natural, after what you’ve been 
through. ... Especially what happened at the Ministry 



He waited for Harry to say something, but Harry did 
not oblige, so he went on, “I have been hoping for an 
occasion to talk to you ever since I gained office, but 
Dumbledore has — most understandably, as I say — 
prevented this.” 

Still, Harry said nothing, waiting. 

“The rumors that have flown around!” said 
Scrimgeour. “Well, of course, we both know how these 
stories get distorted ... all these whispers of a 
prophecy ... of you being ‘the Chosen One’...” 

They were getting near it now, Harry thought, the 
reason Scrimgeour was here. 

"... I assume that Dumbledore has discussed these 
matters with you?” 

Harry deliberated, wondering whether he ought to lie 
or not. He looked at the little gnome prints all around 
the flowerbeds, and the scuffed-up patch that marked 
the spot where Fred had caught the gnome now 
wearing the tutu at the top of the Christmas tree. 
Finally, he decided on the truth ... or a bit of it. 

“Yeah, we’ve discussed it.” 

Page | 387 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Have you, have you ...” said Scrimgeour. Harry could 
see, out of the corner of his eye, Scrimgeour squinting 
at him, so he pretended to be very interested in a 
gnome that had just poked its head out from 
underneath a frozen rhododendron. “And what has 
Dumbledore told you, Harry?” 

“Sorry, but that’s between us,” said Harry. He kept 
his voice as pleasant as he could, and Scrimgeour’s 
tone, too, was light and friendly as he said, “Oh, of 
course, if it’s a question of confidences, I wouldn’t 
want you to divulge ... no, no ... and in any case, does 
it really matter whether you are ‘the Chosen One’ or 
not?” ” 

Harry had to mull that one over for a few seconds 
before responding. “I don’t really know what you 
mean, Minister.” 

“Well, of course, to you it will matter enormously,” 
said Scrimgeour with a laugh. “But to the Wizarding 
community at large ... it’s all perception, isn’t it? It’s 
what people believe that’s important.” 

Harry said nothing. He thought he saw, dimly, where 
they were heading, but he was not going to help 
Scrimgeour get there. The gnome under the 
rhododendron was now digging for worms at its roots, 
and Harry kept his eyes fixed upon it. 

“People believe you are ‘the Chosen One,’ you see,” 
said Scrimgeour. “They think you quite the hero — 
which, of course, you are, Harry, chosen or not! How 
many times have you faced He-Who-Must-Not-Be- 
Named now? Well, anyway,” he pressed on, without 
waiting for a reply, “the point is, you are a symbol of 
hope for many, Harry. The idea that there is 
somebody out there who might be able, who might 
even be destined, to destroy He-Who-Must-Not-Be- 
Page | 388 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Named — well, naturally, it gives people a lift. And I 
can’t help but feel that, once you realize this, you 
might consider it, well, almost a duty, to stand 
alongside the Ministry, and give everyone a boost.” 

The gnome had just managed to get hold of a worm. It 
was now tugging very hard on it, trying to get it out of 
the frozen ground. Harry was silent so long that 
Scrimgeour said, looking from Harry to the gnome, 
“Funny little chaps, aren’t they? But what say you, 
Harry?” 

“I don’t exactly understand what you want,” said 
Harry slowly. “ ‘Stand alongside the Ministry’ ... What 
does that mean?” 

“Oh, well, nothing at all onerous, I assure you,” said 
Scrimgeour. “If you were to be seen popping in and 
out of the Ministry from time to time, for instance, 
that would give the right impression. And of course, 
while you were there, you would have ample 
opportunity to speak to Gawain Robards, my 
successor as Head of the Auror office. Dolores 
Umbridge has told me that you cherish an ambition 
to become an Auror. Well, that could be arranged very 
easily. ...” 

Harry felt anger bubbling in the pit of his stomach: So 
Dolores Umbridge was still at the Ministry, was she? 

“So basically,” he said, as though he just wanted to 
clarify a few points, “you’d like to give the impression 
that I’m working for the Ministry?” 

“It would give everyone a lift to think you were more 
involved, Harry,” said Scrimgeour, sounding relieved 
that Harry had cottoned on so quickly. “ The Chosen 
One,’ you know ... It’s all about giving people hope, 
the feeling that exciting things are happening. ...” 
Page | 389 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“But if I keep running in and out of the Ministry,” 
said Harry, still endeavoring to keep his voice friendly, 
“won’t that seem as though I approve of what the 
Ministry’s up to?” 

“Well,” said Scrimgeour, frowning slightly, “well, yes, 
that’s partly why we’d like — ” 

“No, I don’t think that’ll work,” said Harry pleasantly. 
“You see, I don’t like some of the things the Ministry’s 
doing. Locking up Stan Shunpike, for instance.” 

Scrimgeour did not speak for a moment but his 
expression hardened instantly. “I would not expect 
you to understand,” he said, and he was not as 
successful at keeping anger out of his voice as Harry 
had been. “These are dangerous times, and certain 
measures need to be taken. You are sixteen years old 



“Dumbledore’s a lot older than sixteen, and he doesn’t 
think Stan should be in Azkaban either,” said Harry. 
“You’re making Stan a scapegoat, just like you want 
to make me a mascot.” 

They looked at each other, long and hard. Finally 
Scrimgeour said, with no pretense at warmth, “I see. 
You prefer — like your hero, Dumbledore — to 
disassociate yourself from the Ministry?” 

“I don’t want to be used,” said Harry. 

“Some would say it’s your duty to be used by the 
Ministry!” 

“Yeah, and others might say it’s your duty to check 
that people really are Death Eaters before you chuck 
them in prison,” said Harry, his temper rising now. 
“You’re doing what Barty Crouch did. You never get it 

Page | 390 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




right, you people, do you? Either we’ve got Fudge, 
pretending everything’s lovely while people get 
murdered right under his nose, or we’ve got you, 
chucking the wrong people into jail and trying to 
pretend you’ve got ‘the Chosen One’ working for you!” 

“So you’re not ‘the Chosen One’?” said Scrimgeour. 

“I thought you said it didn’t matter either way?” said 
Harry, with a bitter laugh. “Not to you anyway.” 

“I shouldn’t have said that,” said Scrimgeour quickly. 
“It was tactless — ” 

“No, it was honest,” said Harry. “One of the only 
honest things you’ve said to me. You don’t care 
whether I live or die, but you do care that I help you 
convince everyone you’re winning the war against 
Voldemort. I haven’t forgotten, Minister. ...” 

He raised his right fist. There, shining white on the 
back of his cold hand, were the scars which Dolores 
Umbridge had forced him to carve into his own flesh: / 
must not tell lies. 

“I don’t remember you rushing to my defense when I 
was trying to tell everyone Voldemort was back. The 
Ministry wasn’t so keen to be pals last year.” 

They stood in silence as icy as the ground beneath 
their feet. The gnome had finally managed to extricate 
his worm and was now sucking on it happily, leaning 
against the bottommost branches of the 
rhododendron bush. 

“What is Dumbledore up to?” said Scrimgeour 
brusquely. “Where does he go when he is absent from 
Hogwarts?” 



Page | 391 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No idea,” said Harry. 

“And you wouldn’t tell me if you knew,” said 
Scrimgeour, “would you?” 

“No, I wouldn’t,” said Harry. 

“Well, then, I shall have to see whether I can’t find out 
by other means.” 

“You can try,” said Harry indifferently. “But you seem 
cleverer than Fudge, so I’d have thought you’d have 
learned from his mistakes. He tried interfering at 
Hogwarts. You might have noticed he’s not Minister 
anymore, but Dumbledore’s still headmaster. I’d leave 
Dumbledore alone, if I were you.” 

There was a long pause. 

“Well, it is clear to me that he has done a very good 
job on you,” said Scrimgeour, his eyes cold and hard 
behind his wire-rimmed glasses. “Dumbledore’s man 
through and through, aren’t you, Potter?” 

“Yeah, I am,” said Harry. “Glad we straightened that 
out.” 

And turning his back on the Minister of Magic, he 
strode back toward the house. 



Page | 392 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






A SLUGGISH MEMORY 

Late in the afternoon, a few days after New Year, 
Harry, Ron, and Ginny lined up beside the kitchen 
fire to return to Hogwarts. The Ministry had arranged 
this one-off connection to the Floo Network to return 
students quickly and safely to the school. Only Mrs. 
Weasley was there to say good-bye, as Mr. Weasley, 
Fred, George, Bill, and Fleur were all at work. Mrs. 
Weasley dissolved into tears at the moment of parting. 
Admittedly, it took very little to set her off lately; she 
had been crying on and off ever since Percy had 
stormed from the house on Christmas Day with his 
glasses splattered with mashed parsnip (for which 
Fred, George, and Ginny all claimed credit). 

“Don’t cry, Mum,” said Ginny, patting her on the back 
as Mrs. Weasley sobbed into her shoulder. “It’s okay. 



“Yeah, don’t worry about us,” said Ron, permitting his 
mother to plant a very wet kiss on his cheek, “or 



Page | 393 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



about Percy. He’s such a prat, it’s not really a loss, is 
it?” 



Mrs. Weasley sobbed harder than ever as she 
enfolded Harry in her arms. 

“Promise me you’ll look after yourself. ... Stay out of 
trouble. ...” 

“I always do, Mrs. Weasley,” said Harry. “I like a quiet 
life, you know me.” 

She gave a watery chuckle and stood back. “Be good, 
then, all of you. ...” 

Harry stepped into the emerald fire and shouted 
“Hogwarts!” He had one last fleeting view of the 
Weasleys’ kitchen and Mrs. Weasley’s tearful face 
before the flames engulfed him; spinning very fast, he 
caught blurred glimpses of other Wizarding rooms, 
which were whipped out of sight before he could get a 
proper look; then he was slowing down, finally 
stopping squarely in the fireplace in Professor 
McGonagall’s office. She barely glanced up from her 
work as he clambered out over the grate. 

“Evening, Potter. Try not to get too much ash on the 
carpet.” 

“No, Professor.” 

Harry straightened his glasses and flattened his hair 
as Ron came spinning into view. When Ginny had 
arrived, all three of them trooped out of McGonagall’s 
office and off toward Gryffindor Tower. Harry glanced 
out of the corridor windows as they passed; the sun 
was already sinking over grounds carpeted in deeper 
snow than had lain over the Burrow garden. In the 



Page | 394 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




distance, he could see Hagrid feeding Buckbeak in 
front of his cabin. 



“Baubles,” said Ron confidently, when they reached 
the Fat Lady, who was looking rather paler than 
usual and winced at his loud voice. 

“No,” she said. 

“What d’you mean, ‘no’?” 

“There is a new password,” she said. “And please 
don’t shout.” 

“But we’ve been away, how’re we supposed to — ?” 
“Harry! Ginny!” 

Hermione was hurrying toward them, very pink-faced 
and wearing a cloak, hat, and gloves. 

“I got back a couple of hours ago, I’ve just been down 
to visit Hagrid and Buck — I mean Witherwings,” she 
said breathlessly. “Did you have a good Christmas?” 

“Yeah,” said Ron at once, “pretty eventful, Rufus 
Scrim — ” 

“I’ve got something for you, Harry,” said Hermione, 
neither looking at Ron nor giving any sign that she 
had heard him. “Oh, hang on — password. 
Abstinence.” 

“Precisely,” said the Fat Lady in a feeble voice, and 
swung forward to reveal the portrait hole. 

“What’s up with her?” asked Harry. 



Page | 395 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Overindulged over Christmas, apparently,” said 
Hermione, rolling her eyes as she led the way into the 
packed common room. “She and her friend Violet 
drank their way through all the wine in that picture of 
drunk monks down by the Charms corridor. Anyway 



She rummaged in her pocket for a moment, then 
pulled out a scroll of parchment with Dumbledore’s 
writing on it. 

“Great,” said Harry, unrolling it at once to discover 
that his next lesson with Dumbledore was scheduled 
for the following night. “I’ve got loads to tell him — 
and you. Let’s sit down — ” 

But at that moment there was a loud squeal of “Won- 
Won!” and Lavender Brown came hurtling out of 
nowhere and flung herself into Ron’s arms. Several 
onlookers sniggered; Hermione gave a tinkling laugh 
and said, “There’s a table over here. ... Coming, 
Ginny?” 

“No, thanks, I said I’d meet Dean,” said Ginny, 
though Harry could not help noticing that she did not 
sound very enthusiastic. Leaving Ron and Lavender 
locked in a kind of vertical wrestling match, Harry led 
Hermione over to the spare table. 

“So how was your Christmas?” 

“Oh, fine,” she shrugged. “Nothing special. How was it 
at Won-Won’s?” 

“I’ll tell you in a minute,” said Harry. “Look, 

Hermione, can’t you — ?” 

“No, I can’t,” she said flatly. “So don’t even ask.” 



Page | 396 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I thought maybe, you know, over Christmas — ” 



“It was the Fat Lady who drank a vat of five-hundred- 
year- old wine, Harry, not me. So what was this 
important news you wanted to tell me?” 

She looked too fierce to argue with at that moment, so 
Harry dropped the subject of Ron and recounted all 
that he had overheard between Malfoy and Snape. 
When he had finished, Hermione sat in thought for a 
moment and then said, “Don’t you think — ?” 

“ — he was pretending to offer help so that he could 
trick Malfoy into telling him what he’s doing?” 

“Well, yes,” said Hermione. 

“Ron’s dad and Lupin think so,” Harry said 
grudgingly. “But this definitely proves Malfoy’s 
planning something, you can’t deny that.” 

“No, I can’t,” she answered slowly. 

“And he’s acting on Voldemort’s orders, just like I 
said!” 

“Hmm . . . did either of them actually mention 
Voldemort’s name?” 

Harry frowned, trying to remember. “I’m not sure ... 
Snape definitely said your master,’ and who else 
would that be?” 

“I don’t know,” said Hermione, biting her lip. “Maybe 
his father?” 

She stared across the room, apparently lost in 
thought, not even noticing Lavender tickling Ron. 
“How’s Lupin?” 

Page | 397 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Not great,” said Harry, and he told her all about 
Lupin’s mission among the werewolves and the 
difficulties he was facing. “Have you heard of this 
Fenrir Grey back?” 

“Yes, I have!” said Hermione, sounding startled. “And 
so have you, Harry!” 

“When, History of Magic? You know full well I never 
listened ...” 

“No, no, not History of Magic — Malfoy threatened 
Borgin with him!” said Hermione. “Back in Knockturn 
Alley, don’t you remember? He told Borgin that 
Grey back was an old family friend and that he’d be 
checking up on Borgin’s progress!” 

Harry gaped at her. “I forgot! But this proves Malfoy’s 
a Death Eater, how else could he be in contact with 
Greyback and telling him what to do?” 

“It is pretty suspicious,” breathed Hermione. “Unless 



“Oh, come on,” said Harry in exasperation, “you can’t 
get round this one!” 

“Well ... there is the possibility it was an empty 
threat.” 

“You’re unbelievable, you are,” said Harry, shaking 
his head. “We’ll see who’s right. ... You’ll be eating 
your words, Hermione, just like the Ministry. Oh 
yeah, I had a row with Rufus Scrimgeour as well. ...” 

And the rest of the evening passed amicably with both 
of them abusing the Minister of Magic, for Hermione, 
like Ron, thought that after all the Ministry had put 



Page | 398 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry through the previous year, they had a great 
deal of nerve asking him for help now. 

The new term started next morning with a pleasant 
surprise for the sixth years: a large sign had been 
pinned to the common room notice boards overnight. 

APPARITION LESSONS 

If you are seventeen years of age, or will turn 
seventeen on or before the 31st August next, you are 
eligible for a twelve-week course of Apparition Lessons 
from a Ministry of Magic Apparition instructor. Please 
sign below if you would like to participate. Cost: 12 
Galleons. 

Harry and Ron joined the crowd that was jostling 
around the notice and taking it in turns to write their 
names at the bottom. Ron was just taking out his 
quill to sign after Hermione when Lavender crept up 
behind him, slipped her hands over his eyes, and 
trilled, “Guess who, Won-Won?” Harry turned to see 
Hermione stalking off; he caught up with her, having 
no wish to stay behind with Ron and Lavender, but to 
his surprise, Ron caught up with them only a little 
way beyond the portrait hole, his ears bright red and 
his expression disgruntled. Without a word, Hermione 
sped up to walk with Neville. 

“So — Apparition,” said Ron, his tone making it 
perfectly plain that Harry was not to mention what 
had just happened. “Should be a laugh, eh?” 

“I dunno,” said Harry. “Maybe it’s better when you do 
it yourself, I didn’t enjoy it much when Dumbledore 
took me along for the ride.” 



Page | 399 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I forgot you’d already done it. ... I’d better pass my 
test first time,” said Ron, looking anxious. “Fred and 
George did.” 

“Charlie failed, though, didn’t he?” 

“Yeah, but Charlie’s bigger than me” — Ron held his 
arms out from his body as though he was a gorilla — 
“so Fred and George didn’t go on about it much ... not 
to his face anyway ...” 

“When can we take the actual test?” 

“Soon as we’re seventeen. That’s only March for me!” 

“Yeah, but you wouldn’t be able to Apparate in here, 
not in the castle ...” 

“Not the point, is it? Everyone would know I could 
Apparate if I wanted.” 

Ron was not the only one to be excited at the prospect 
of Apparition. All that day there was much talk about 
the forthcoming lessons; a great deal of store was set 
by being able to vanish and reappear at will. 

“How cool will it be when we can just — ” Seamus 
clicked his fingers to indicate disappearance. “Me 
cousin Fergus does it just to annoy me, you wait till I 
can do it back ... He’ll never have another peaceful 
moment. ...” 

Lost in visions of this happy prospect, he flicked his 
wand a little too enthusiastically, so that instead of 
producing the fountain of pure water that was the 
object of today’s Charms lesson, he let out a hoselike 
jet that ricocheted off the ceiling and knocked 
Professor Flitwick flat on his face. 



Page | 400 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Harry’s already Apparated,” Ron told a slightly 
abashed Seamus, after Professor Flitwick had dried 
himself off with a wave of his wand and set Seamus 
lines: “I am a wizard, not a baboon brandishing a 
stick.” “Dum — er — someone took him. Side-Along- 
Apparition, you know.” 

“Whoa!” whispered Seamus, and he, Dean, and 
Neville put their heads a little closer to hear what 
Apparition felt like. For the rest of the day, Harry was 
besieged with requests from the other sixth years to 
describe the sensation of Apparition. All of them 
seemed awed, rather than put off, when he told them 
how uncomfortable it was, and he was still answering 
detailed questions at ten to eight that evening, when 
he was forced to lie and say that he needed to return 
a book to the library, so as to escape in time for his 
lesson with Dumbledore. 

The lamps in Dumbledore ’s office were lit, the 
portraits of previous headmasters were snoring gently 
in their frames, and the Pensieve was ready upon the 
desk once more. Dumbledore ’s hands lay on either 
side of it, the right one as blackened and burnt- 
looking as ever. It did not seem to have healed at all 
and Harry wondered, for perhaps the hundredth time, 
what had caused such a distinctive injury, but did 
not ask; Dumbledore had said that he would know 
eventually and there was, in any case, another 
subject he wanted to discuss. But before Harry could 
say anything about Snape and Malfoy, Dumbledore 
spoke. 

“I hear that you met the Minister of Magic over 
Christmas?” 

“Yes,” said Harry. “He’s not very happy with me.” 



Page | 401 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




“No,” sighed Dumbledore. “He is not very happy with 
me either. We must try not to sink beneath our 
anguish, Harry, but battle on.” 

Harry grinned. 

“He wanted me to tell the Wizarding community that 
the Ministry’s doing a wonderful job.” 

Dumbledore smiled. 

“It was Fudge’s idea originally, you know. During his 
last days in office, when he was trying desperately to 
cling to his post, he sought a meeting with you, 
hoping that you would give him your support — ” 

“After everything Fudge did last year?” said Harry 
angrily. “After Umbridge?” 

“I told Cornelius there was no chance of it, but the 
idea did not die when he left office. Within hours of 
Scrimgeour’s appointment we met and he demanded 
that I arrange a meeting with you — ” 

“So that’s why you argued!” Harry blurted out. “It was 
in the Daily Prophet” 

“The Prophet is bound to report the truth 
occasionally,” said Dumbledore, “if only accidentally. 
Yes, that was why we argued. Well, it appears that 
Rufus found a way to corner you at last.” 

“He accused me of being ‘Dumbledore ’s man through 
and through.’ ” 

“How very rude of him.” 

“I told him I was.” 



Page | 402 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore opened his mouth to speak and then 
closed it again. Behind Harry, Fawkes the phoenix let 
out a low, soft, musical cry. To Harry’s intense 
embarrassment, he suddenly realized that 
Dumbledore ’s bright blue eyes looked rather watery, 
and stared hastily at his own knees. When 
Dumbledore spoke, however, his voice was quite 
steady. 

“I am very touched, Harry.” 

“Scrimgeour wanted to know where you go when 
you’re not at Hogwarts,” said Harry, still looking 
fixedly at his knees. 

“Yes, he is very nosy about that,” said Dumbledore, 
now sounding cheerful, and Harry thought it safe to 
look up again. “He has even attempted to have me 
followed. Amusing, really. He set Dawlish to tail me. It 
wasn’t kind. I have already been forced to jinx 
Dawlish once; I did it again with the greatest regret.” 

“So they still don’t know where you go?” asked Harry, 
hoping for more information on this intriguing 
subject, but Dumbledore merely smiled over the top 
of his half-moon spectacles. 

“No, they don’t, and the time is not quite right for you 
to know either. Now, I suggest we press on, unless 
there’s anything else — ?” 

“There is, actually, sir,” said Harry. “It’s about Malfoy 
and Snape.” 

“Professor Snape, Harry.” 

“Yes, sir. I overheard them during Professor 
Slughorn’s party ... well, I followed them, actually. ...” 



Page | 403 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore listened to Harry’s story with an 
impassive face. When Harry had finished he did not 
speak for a few moments, then said, “Thank you for 
telling me this, Harry, but I suggest that you put it 
out of your mind. I do not think that it is of great 
importance.” 

“Not of great importance?” repeated Harry 
incredulously. “Professor, did you understand — ?” 

“Yes, Harry, blessed as I am with extraordinary 
brainpower, I understood everything you told me,” 
said Dumbledore, a little sharply. “I think you might 
even consider the possibility that I understood more 
than you did. Again, I am glad that you have confided 
in me, but let me reassure you that you have not told 
me anything that causes me disquiet.” 

Harry sat in seething silence, glaring at Dumbledore. 
What was going on? Did this mean that Dumbledore 
had indeed ordered Snape to find out what Malfoy 
was doing, in which case he had already heard 
everything Harry had just told him from Snape? Or 
was he really worried by what he had heard, but 
pretending not to be? 

“So, sir,” said Harry, in what he hoped was a polite, 
calm voice, “you definitely still trust — ?” 

“I have been tolerant enough to answer that question 
already,” said Dumbledore, but he did not sound very 
tolerant anymore. “My answer has not changed.” 

“I should think not,” said a snide voice; Phineas 
Nigellus was evidently only pretending to be asleep. 
Dumbledore ignored him. 



Page | 404 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“And now, Harry, I must insist that we press on. I 
have more important things to discuss with you this 
evening.” 

Harry sat there feeling mutinous. How would it be if 
he refused to permit the change of subject, if he 
insisted upon arguing the case against Malfoy? As 
though he had read Harry’s mind, Dumbledore shook 
his head. 

“Ah, Harry, how often this happens, even between the 
best of friends! Each of us believes that what he has 
to say is much more important than anything the 
other might have to contribute!” 

“I don’t think what you’ve got to say is unimportant, 
sir,” said Harry stiffly. 

“Well, you are quite right, because it is not,” said 
Dumbledore briskly. “I have two more memories to 
show you this evening, both obtained with enormous 
difficulty, and the second of them is, I think, the most 
important I have collected.” 

Harry did not say anything to this; he still felt angry 
at the reception his confidences had received, but 
could not see what was to be gained by arguing 
further. 

“So,” said Dumbledore, in a ringing voice, “we meet 
this evening to continue the tale of Tom Riddle, whom 
we left last lesson poised on the threshold of his years 
at Hogwarts. You will remember how excited he was 
to hear that he was a wizard, that he refused my 
company on a trip to Diagon Alley, and that I, in turn, 
warned him against continued thievery when he 
arrived at school. 



Page | 405 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, the start of the school year arrived and with it 
came Tom Riddle, a quiet boy in his secondhand 
robes, who lined up with the other first years to be 
sorted. He was placed in Slytherin House almost the 
moment that the Sorting Hat touched his head,” 
continued Dumbledore, waving his blackened hand 
toward the shelf over his head where the Sorting Hat 
sat, ancient and unmoving. “How soon Riddle learned 
that the famous founder of the House could talk to 
snakes, I do not know — perhaps that very evening. 
The knowledge can only have excited him and 
increased his sense of self-importance. 

“However, if he was frightening or impressing fellow 
Slytherins with displays of Parseltongue in their 
common room, no hint of it reached the staff. He 
showed no sign of outward arrogance or aggression at 
all. As an unusually talented and very good-looking 
orphan, he naturally drew attention and sympathy 
from the staff almost from the moment of his arrival. 
He seemed polite, quiet, and thirsty for knowledge. 
Nearly all were most favorably impressed by him.” 

“Didn’t you tell them, sir, what he’d been like when 
you met him at the orphanage?” asked Harry. 

“No, I did not. Though he had shown no hint of 
remorse, it was possible that he felt sorry for how he 
had behaved before and was resolved to turn over a 
fresh leaf. I chose to give him that chance.” 

Dumbledore paused and looked inquiringly at Harry, 
who had opened his mouth to speak. Here, again, was 
Dumbledore ’s tendency to trust people in spite of 
overwhelming evidence that they did not deserve it! 
But then Harry remembered something. . . . 

“But you didn’t really trust him, sir, did you? He told 
me . . . the Riddle who came out of that diary said, 

Page | 406 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




‘Dumbledore never seemed to like me as much as the 
other teachers did.’ ” 

“Let us say that I did not take it for granted that he 
was trustworthy,” said Dumbledore. “I had, as I have 
already indicated, resolved to keep a close eye upon 
him, and so I did. I cannot pretend that I gleaned a 
great deal from my observations at first. He was very 
guarded with me; he felt, I am sure, that in the thrill 
of discovering his true identity he had told me a little 
too much. He was careful never to reveal as much 
again, but he could not take back what he had let slip 
in his excitement, nor what Mrs. Cole had confided in 
me. However, he had the sense never to try and 
charm me as he charmed so many of my colleagues. 

“As he moved up the school, he gathered about him a 
group of dedicated friends; I call them that, for want 
of a better term, although as I have already indicated, 
Riddle undoubtedly felt no affection for any of them. 
This group had a kind of dark glamour within the 
castle. They were a motley collection; a mixture of the 
weak seeking protection, the ambitious seeking some 
shared glory, and the thuggish gravitating toward a 
leader who could show them more refined forms of 
cruelty. In other words, they were the forerunners of 
the Death Eaters, and indeed some of them became 
the first Death Eaters after leaving Hogwarts. 

“Rigidly controlled by Riddle, they were never detected 
in open wrongdoing, although their seven years at 
Hogwarts were marked by a number of nasty 
incidents to which they were never satisfactorily 
linked, the most serious of which was, of course, the 
opening of the Chamber of Secrets, which resulted in 
the death of a girl. As you know, Hagrid was wrongly 
accused of that crime. 



Page | 407 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I have not been able to find many memories of Riddle 
at Hogwarts,” said Dumbledore, placing his withered 
hand on the Pensieve. “Few who knew him then are 
prepared to talk about him; they are too terrified. 
What I know, I found out after he had left Hogwarts, 
after much painstaking effort, after tracing those few 
who could be tricked into speaking, after searching 
old records and questioning Muggle and wizard 
witnesses alike. 

“Those whom I could persuade to talk told me that 
Riddle was obsessed with his parentage. This is 
understandable, of course; he had grown up in an 
orphanage and naturally wished to know how he 
came to be there. It seems that he searched in vain 
for some trace of Tom Riddle senior on the shields in 
the trophy room, on the lists of prefects in the old 
school records, even in the books of Wizarding 
history. Finally he was forced to accept that his father 
had never set foot in Hogwarts. I believe that it was 
then that he dropped the name forever, assumed the 
identity of Lord Voldemort, and began his 
investigations into his previously despised mother’s 
family — the woman whom, you will remember, he 
had thought could not be a witch if she had 
succumbed to the shameful human weakness of 
death. 

“All he had to go upon was the single name ‘Marvolo,’ 
which he knew from those who ran the orphanage 
had been his mother’s father’s name. Finally, after 
painstaking research through old books of Wizarding 
families, he discovered the existence of Slytherin’s 
surviving line. In the summer of his sixteenth year, he 
left the orphanage to which he returned annually and 
set off to find his Gaunt relatives. And now, Harry, if 
you will stand ...” 



Page | 408 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore rose, and Harry saw that he was again 
holding a small crystal bottle filled with swirling, 
pearly memory. 

“I was very lucky to collect this,” he said, as he 
poured the gleaming mass into the Pensieve. “As you 
will understand when we have experienced it. Shall 
we?” 

Harry stepped up to the stone basin and bowed 
obediently until his face sank through the surface of 
the memory; he felt the familiar sensation of falling 
through nothingness and then landed upon a dirty 
stone floor in almost total darkness. 

It took him several seconds to recognize the place, by 
which time Dumbledore had landed beside him. The 
Gaunts’ house was now more indescribably filthy 
than anywhere Harry had ever seen. The ceiling was 
thick with cobwebs, the floor coated in grime; moldy 
and rotting food lay upon the table amidst a mass of 
crusted pots. The only light came from a single 
guttering candle placed at the feet of a man with hair 
and beard so overgrown Harry could see neither eyes 
nor mouth. He was slumped in an armchair by the 
fire, and Harry wondered for a moment whether he 
was dead. But then there came a loud knock on the 
door and the man jerked awake, raising a wand in his 
right hand and a short knife in his left. 

The door creaked open. There on the threshold, 
holding an old-fashioned lamp, stood a boy Harry 
recognized at once: tall, pale, dark-haired, and 
handsome — the teenage Voldemort. 

Voldemort’s eyes moved slowly around the hovel and 
then found the man in the armchair. For a few 
seconds they looked at each other, then the man 



Page | 409 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




staggered upright, the many empty bottles at his feet 
clattering and tinkling across the floor. 

“YOU!” he bellowed. “YOU!” 

And he hurtled drunkenly at Riddle, wand and knife 
held aloft. 

“Stop.” 

Riddle spoke in Parseltongue. The man skidded into 
the table, sending moldy pots crashing to the floor. He 
stared at Riddle. There was a long silence while they 
contemplated each other. The man broke it. 

“ You speak it?” 

“Yes, I speak it,” said Riddle. He moved forward into 
the room, allowing the door to swing shut behind 
him. Harry could not help but feel a resentful 
admiration for Voldemort’s complete lack of fear. His 
face merely expressed disgust and, perhaps, 
disappointment. 

“Where is Marvolo?” he asked. 

“Dead,” said the other. “Died years ago, didn’t he?” 
Riddle frowned. 

“ Who are you, then?” 

“I’m Morfin, ain’t 1?” 

“ Marvolo’ s son?” 

“ ’Course I am, then ...” 



Page | 410 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




Morfin pushed the hair out of his dirty face, the better 
to see Riddle, and Harry saw that he wore Marvolo’s 
black-stoned ring on his right hand. 

“I thought you was that Muggle,” whispered Morfin. 

“ You look mighty like that Muggle .” 

“What Muggle?” said Riddle sharply. 

“That Muggle what my sister took a fancy to, that 
Muggle what lives in the big house over the way,” said 
Morfin, and he spat unexpectedly upon the floor 
between them. “You look right like him. Riddle. But 
he’s older now, in ’e? He’s older’n you, now I think on 
it. ...” 

Morfin looked slightly dazed and swayed a little, still 
clutching the edge of the table for support. “He come 
back, see,” he added stupidly. 

Voldemort was gazing at Morfin as though appraising 
his possibilities. Now he moved a little closer and 
said, “Riddle came back?” 

“Ar, he left her, and serve her right, marrying filth\” 
said Morfin, spitting on the floor again. “Robbed us, 
mind, before she ran off! Where’s the locket, eh, 
where’s Slytherin’s locket?” 

Voldemort did not answer. Morfin was working 
himself into a rage again; he brandished his knife and 
shouted, “Dishonored us, she did, that little slut! And 
who’re you, coming here and asking questions about 
all that? It’s over, innit. ... It’s over. ...” 

He looked away, staggering slightly, and Voldemort 
moved forward. As he did so, an unnatural darkness 
fell, extinguishing Voldemort’s lamp and Morfin ’s 
candle, extinguishing everything. ... 

Page | 411 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore’s fingers closed tightly around Harry’s 
arm and they were soaring back into the present 
again. The soft golden light in Dumbledore’s office 
seemed to dazzle Harry’s eyes after that impenetrable 
darkness. 

“Is that all?” said Harry at once. “Why did it go dark, 
what happened?” 

“Because Morfin could not remember anything from 
that point onward,” said Dumbledore, gesturing Harry 
back into his seat. “When he awoke next morning, he 
was lying on the floor, quite alone. Marvolo’s ring had 
gone. 

“Meanwhile, in the village of Little Hangleton, a maid 
was running along the High Street, screaming that 
there were three bodies lying in the drawing room of 
the big house: Tom Riddle Senior and his mother and 
father. 

“The Muggle authorities were perplexed. As far as I 
am aware, they do not know to this day how the 
Riddles died, for the Avada Kedavra curse does not 
usually leave any sign of damage. ... The exception 
sits before me,” Dumbledore added, with a nod to 
Harry’s scar. “The Ministry, on the other hand, knew 
at once that this was a wizard’s murder. They also 
knew that a convicted Muggle-hater lived across the 
valley from the Riddle house, a Muggle-hater who had 
already been imprisoned once for attacking one of the 
murdered people. 

“So the Ministry called upon Morfin. They did not 
need to question him, to use Veritaserum or 
Legilimency. He admitted to the murder on the spot, 
giving details only the murderer could know. He was 
proud, he said, to have killed the Muggles, had been 
awaiting his chance all these years. He handed over 
Page | 412 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




his wand, which was proved at once to have been 
used to kill the Riddles. And he permitted himself to 
be led off to Azkaban without a fight. All that 
disturbed him was the fact that his father’s ring had 
disappeared. ‘He’ll kill me for losing it,’ he told his 
captors over and over again. ‘He’ll kill me for losing 
his ring. ’ And that, apparently, was all he ever said 
again. He lived out the remainder of his life in 
Azkaban, lamenting the loss of Marvolo’s last 
heirloom, and is buried beside the prison, alongside 
the other poor souls who have expired within its 
walls.” 

“So Voldemort stole Morfin’s wand and used it?” said 
Harry, sitting up straight. 

“That’s right,” said Dumbledore. “We have no 
memories to show us this, but I think we can be fairly 
sure what happened. Voldemort Stupefied his uncle, 
took his wand, and proceeded across the valley to ‘the 
big house over the way. ’ There he murdered the 
Muggle man who had abandoned his witch mother, 
and, for good measure, his Muggle grandparents, 
thus obliterating the last of the unworthy Riddle line 
and revenging himself upon the father who never 
wanted him. Then he returned to the Gaunt hovel, 
performed the complex bit of magic that would 
implant a false memory in his uncle’s mind, laid 
Morfin’s wand beside its unconscious owner, 
pocketed the ancient ring he wore, and departed.” 

“And Morfin never realized he hadn’t done it?” 

“Never,” said Dumbledore. “He gave, as I say, a full 
and boastful confession.” 

“But he had this real memory in him all the time!” 



Page | 413 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




“Yes, but it took a great deal of skilled Legilimency to 
coax it out of him,” said Dumbledore, “and why 
should anybody delve further into Morfin’s mind 
when he had already confessed to the crime? 

However, I was able to secure a visit to Morfin in the 
last weeks of his life, by which time I was attempting 
to discover as much as I could about Voldemort’s 
past. I extracted this memory with difficulty. When I 
saw what it contained, I attempted to use it to secure 
Morfin’s release from Azkaban. Before the Ministry 
reached their decision, however, Morfin had died.” 

“But how come the Ministry didn’t realize that 
Voldemort had done all that to Morfin?” Harry asked 
angrily. “He was underage at the time, wasn’t he? I 
thought they could detect underage magic!” 

“You are quite right — they can detect magic, but not 
the perpetrator: You will remember that you were 
blamed by the Ministry for the Hover Charm that was, 
in fact, cast by — ” 

“Dobby,” growled Harry; this injustice still rankled. 

“So if you’re underage and you do magic inside an 
adult witch or wizard’s house, the Ministry won’t 
know?” 

“They will certainly be unable to tell who performed 
the magic,” said Dumbledore, smiling slightly at the 
look of great indignation on Harry’s face. “They rely 
on witch and wizard parents to enforce their 
offspring’s obedience while within their walls.” 

“Well, that’s rubbish,” snapped Harry. “Look what 
happened here, look what happened to Morfin!” 

“I agree,” said Dumbledore. “Whatever Morfin was, he 
did not deserve to die as he did, blamed for murders 



Page | 414 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




he had not committed. But it is getting late, and I 
want you to see this other memory before we part. ...” 



Dumbledore took from an inside pocket another 
crystal phial and Harry fell silent at once, 
remembering that Dumbledore had said it was the 
most important one he had collected. Harry noticed 
that the contents proved difficult to empty into the 
Pensieve, as though they had congealed slightly; did 
memories go bad? 

“This will not take long,” said Dumbledore, when he 
had finally emptied the phial. “We shall be back 
before you know it. Once more into the Pensieve, then 



And Harry fell again through the silver surface, 
landing this time right in front of a man he recognized 
at once. 

It was a much younger Horace Slughorn. Harry was 
so used to him bald that he found the sight of 
Slughorn with thick, shiny, straw-colored hair quite 
disconcerting; it looked as though he had had his 
head thatched, though there was already a shiny 
Galleon-sized bald patch on his crown. His mustache, 
less massive than it was these days, was gingery- 
blond. He was not quite as rotund as the Slughorn 
Harry knew, though the golden buttons on his richly 
embroidered waistcoat were taking a fair amount of 
strain. His little feet resting upon a velvet pouffe, he 
was sitting well back in a comfortable winged 
armchair, one hand grasping a small glass of wine, 
the other searching through a box of crystalized 
pineapple. 

Harry looked around as Dumbledore appeared beside 
him and saw that they were standing in Slughorn ’s 
office. Half a dozen boys were sitting around 

Page | 415 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Slughorn, all on harder or lower seats than his, and 
all in their mid-teens. Harry recognized Voldemort at 
once. His was the most handsome face and he looked 
the most relaxed of all the boys. His right hand lay 
negligently upon the arm of his chair; with a jolt, 
Harry saw that he was wearing Marvolo’s gold-and- 
black ring; he had already killed his father. 

“Sir, is it true that Professor Merrythought is 
retiring?” he asked. 

“Tom, Tom, if I knew I couldn’t tell you,” said 
Slughorn, wagging a reproving, sugar-covered finger 
at Riddle, though ruining the effect slightly by 
winking. “I must say, I’d like to know where you get 
your information, boy, more knowledgeable than half 
the staff, you are.” 

Riddle smiled; the other boys laughed and cast him 
admiring looks. 

“What with your uncanny ability to know things you 
shouldn’t, and your careful flattery of the people who 
matter — thank you for the pineapple, by the way, 
you’re quite right, it is my favorite — ” 

As several of the boys tittered, something very odd 
happened. The whole room was suddenly filled with a 
thick white fog, so that Harry could see nothing but 
the face of Dumbledore, who was standing beside 
him. Then Slughorn ’s voice rang out through the 
mist, unnaturally loudly, “ You’ll go wrong, boy, mark 
my words.” 

The fog cleared as suddenly as it had appeared and 
yet nobody made any allusion to it, nor did anybody 
look as though anything unusual had just happened. 
Bewildered, Harry looked around as a small golden 



Page | 416 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




clock standing upon Slughorn’s desk chimed eleven 
o’clock. 

“Good gracious, is it that time already?” said 
Slughorn. “You’d better get going, boys, or we’ll all be 
in trouble. Lestrange, I want your essay by tomorrow 
or it’s detention. Same goes for you, Avery.” 

Slughorn pulled himself out of his armchair and 
carried his empty glass over to his desk as the boys 
filed out. Voldemort, however, stayed behind. Harry 
could tell he had dawdled deliberately, wanting to be 
last in the room with Slughorn. 

“Look sharp, Tom,” said Slughorn, turning around 
and finding him still present. “You don’t want to be 
caught out of bed out of hours, and you a prefect ...” 

“Sir, I wanted to ask you something.” 

“Ask away, then, m’boy, ask away. ...” 

“Sir, I wondered what you know about . . . about 
Horcruxes?” 

And it happened all over again: The dense fog filled 
the room so that Harry could not see Slughorn or 
Voldemort at all; only Dumbledore, smiling serenely 
beside him. Then Slughorn’s voice boomed out again, 
just as it had done before. 

“I don’t know anything about Horcruxes and I wouldn’t 
tell you if I did! Now get out of here at once and don’t 
let me catch you mentioning them again\” 

“Well, that’s that,” said Dumbledore placidly beside 
Harry. “Time to go.” 



Page | 417 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




And Harry’s feet left the floor to fall, seconds later, 
back onto the mg in front of Dumbledore’s desk. 



“That’s all there is?” said Harry blankly. 

Dumbledore had said that this was the most 
important memory of all, but he could not see what 
was so significant about it. Admittedly the fog, and 
the fact that nobody seemed to have noticed it, was 
odd, but other than that nothing seemed to have 
happened except that Voldemort had asked a 
question and failed to get an answer. 

“As you might have noticed,” said Dumbledore, 
reseating himself behind his desk, “that memory has 
been tampered with.” 

“Tampered with?” repeated Harry, sitting back down 
too. 

“Certainly,” said Dumbledore. “Professor Slughorn 
has meddled with his own recollections.” 

“But why would he do that?” 

“Because, I think, he is ashamed of what he 
remembers,” said Dumbledore. “He has tried to 
rework the memory to show himself in a better light, 
obliterating those parts which he does not wish me to 
see. It is, as you will have noticed, very crudely done, 
and that is all to the good, for it shows that the true 
memory is still there beneath the alterations. 

“And so, for the first time, I am giving you homework, 
Harry. It will be your job to persuade Professor 
Slughorn to divulge the real memory, which will 
undoubtedly be our most crucial piece of information 
of all.” 

Page | 418 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry stared at him. 

“But surely, sir,” he said, keeping his voice as 
respectful as possible, “you don’t need me — you 
could use Legilimency ... or Veritaserum. ...” 

“Professor Slughorn is an extremely able wizard who 
will be expecting both,” said Dumbledore. “He is 
much more accomplished at Occlumency than poor 
Morfin Gaunt, and I would be astonished if he has 
not carried an antidote to Veritaserum with him ever 
since I coerced him into giving me this travesty of a 
recollection. 

“No, I think it would be foolish to attempt to wrest the 
truth from Professor Slughorn by force, and might do 
much more harm than good; I do not wish him to 
leave Hogwarts. However, he has his weaknesses like 
the rest of us, and I believe that you are the one 
person who might be able to penetrate his defenses. It 
is most important that we secure the true memory, 
Harry. ... How important, we will only know when we 
have seen the real thing. So, good luck ... and good 
night.” 

A little taken aback by the abrupt dismissal, Harry 
got to his feet quickly. “Good night, sir.” 

As he closed the study door behind him, he distinctly 
heard Phineas Nigellus say, “I can’t see why the boy 
should be able to do it better than you, Dumbledore.” 

“I wouldn’t expect you to, Phineas,” replied 
Dumbledore, and Fawkes gave another low, musical 
cry. 



Page | 419 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






BIRTHDAY SURPRISES 

The next day Harry confided in both Ron and 
Hermione the task that Dumbledore had set him, 
though separately, for Hermione still refused to 
remain in Ron’s presence longer than it took to give 
him a contemptuous look. 

Ron thought that Harry was unlikely to have any 
trouble with Slughorn at all. 

“He loves you,” he said over breakfast, waving an airy 
forkful of fried egg. “Won’t refuse you anything, will 
he? Not his little Potions Prince. Just hang back after 
class this afternoon and ask him.” 

Hermione, however, took a gloomier view. “He must 
be determined to hide what really happened if 
Dumbledore couldn’t get it out of him,” she said in a 
low voice, as they stood in the deserted, snowy 
courtyard at break. “Horcruxes ... Horcruxes ... I’ve 
never even heard of them. ...” 



Page | 420 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



“You haven’t?” Harry was disappointed; he had hoped 
that Hermione might have been able to give him a 
clue as to what Horcruxes were. 



“They must be really advanced Dark Magic, or why 
would Voldemort have wanted to know about them? I 
think it’s going to be difficult to get the information, 
Harry, you’ll have to be very careful about how you 
approach Slughorn, think out a strategy. ...” 

“Ron reckons I should just hang back after Potions 
this afternoon. ...” 

“Oh, well, if Won-Won thinks that, you’d better do it,” 
she said, flaring up at once. “After all, when has Won- 
Won’s judgment ever been faulty?” 

“Hermione, can’t you — ?” 

“iVo!” she said angrily, and stormed away, leaving 
Harry alone and ankle-deep in snow. 

Potions lessons were uncomfortable enough these 
days, seeing as Harry, Ron, and Hermione had to 
share a desk. Today, Hermione moved her cauldron 
around the table so that she was close to Ernie, and 
ignored both Harry and Ron. 

“What’ve you done?” Ron muttered to Harry, looking 
at Hermione ’s haughty profile. 

But before Harry could answer, Slughorn was calling 
for silence from the front of the room. 

“Settle down, settle down, please! Quickly, now, lots 
of work to get through this afternoon! Golpalott’s 
Third Law ... who can tell me — ? But Miss Granger 
can, of course!” 

Page | 421 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione recited at top speed: “Golpalott’s-Third- 
Law-states-that-the-antidote-for-a-blended-poison- 
will-be-equal-to-more-than-the-sum-of-the-antidotes- 
for-each-of-the-separate-components.” 

“Precisely!” beamed Slughorn. “Ten points for 
Gryffindor! Now, if we accept Golpalott’s Third Law as 
true ...” 

Harry was going to have to take Slughorn ’s word for it 
that Golpalott’s Third Law was true, because he had 
not understood any of it. Nobody apart from 
Hermione seemed to be following what Slughorn said 
next either. 

"... which means, of course, that assuming we have 
achieved correct identification of the potion’s 
ingredients by Scarpin’s Revelaspell, our primary aim 
is not the relatively simple one of selecting antidotes 
to those ingredients in and of themselves, but to find 
that added component that will, by an almost 
alchemical process, transform these disparate 
elements — ” 

Ron was sitting beside Harry with his mouth half 
open, doodling absently on his new copy of Advanced 
Potion-Making. Ron kept forgetting that he could no 
longer rely on Hermione to help him out of trouble 
when he failed to grasp what was going on. 

"... and so,” finished Slughorn, “I want each of you to 
come and take one of these phials from my desk. You 
are to create an antidote for the poison within it 
before the end of the lesson. Good luck, and don’t 
forget your protective gloves!” 

Hermione had left her stool and was halfway toward 
Slughorn ’s desk before the rest of the class had 
realized it was time to move, and by the time Harry, 

Page | 422 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Ron, and Ernie returned to the table, she had already 
tipped the contents of her phial into her cauldron and 
was kindling a fire underneath it. 

“It’s a shame that the Prince won’t be able to help you 
much with this, Harry,” she said brightly as she 
straightened up. “You have to understand the 
principles involved this time. No shortcuts or cheats!” 

Annoyed, Harry uncorked the poison he had taken 
from Slughorn’s desk, which was a garish shade of 
pink, tipped it into his cauldron, and lit a fire 
underneath it. He did not have the faintest idea what 
he was supposed to do next. He glanced around at 
Ron, who was now standing there looking rather 
gormless, having copied everything Harry had done. 

“You sure the Prince hasn’t got any tips?” Ron 
muttered to Harry. 

Harry pulled out his trusty copy of Advanced Potion- 
Making and turned to the chapter on antidotes. There 
was Golpalott’s Third Law, stated word for word as 
Hermione had recited it, but not a single illuminating 
note in the Prince’s hand to explain what it meant. 
Apparently the Prince, like Hermione, had had no 
difficulty understanding it. 

“Nothing,” said Harry gloomily. 

Hermione was now waving her wand enthusiastically 
over her cauldron. Unfortunately, they could not copy 
the spell she was doing because she was now so good 
at nonverbal incantations that she did not need to say 
the words aloud. Ernie Macmillan, however, was 
muttering, “Specialis Reveliol” over his cauldron, 
which sounded impressive, so Harry and Ron 
hastened to imitate him. 



Page | 423 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




It took Harry only five minutes to realize that his 
reputation as the best potion-maker in the class was 
crashing around his ears. Slughorn had peered 
hopefully into his cauldron on his first circuit of the 
dungeon, preparing to exclaim in delight as he 
usually did, and instead had withdrawn his head 
hastily, coughing, as the smell of bad eggs 
overwhelmed him. Hermione’s expression could not 
have been any smugger; she had loathed being 
outperformed in every Potions class. She was now 
decanting the mysteriously separated ingredients of 
her poison into ten different crystal phials. More to 
avoid watching this irritating sight than anything 
else, Harry bent over the Half-Blood Prince’s book and 
turned a few pages with unnecessary force. 

And there it was, scrawled right across a long list of 
antidotes: 

Just shove a bezoar down their throats. 

Harry stared at these words for a moment. Hadn’t he 
once, long ago, heard of bezoars? Hadn’t Snape 
mentioned them in their first-ever Potions lesson? “A 
stone taken from the stomach of a goat, which will 
protect from most poisons.” 

It was not an answer to the Golpalott problem, and 
had Snape still been their teacher, Harry would not 
have dared do it, but this was a moment for desperate 
measures. He hastened toward the store cupboard 
and rummaged within it, pushing aside unicorn 
horns and tangles of dried herbs until he found, at 
the very back, a small cardboard box on which had 
been scribbled the word bezoars. 

He opened the box just as Slughorn called, “Two 
minutes left, everyone!” Inside were half a dozen 



Page | 424 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




shriveled brown objects, looking more like dried-up 
kidneys than real stones. Harry seized one, put the 
box back in the cupboard, and hurried back to his 
cauldron. 

“Time’s ... UP!” called Slughorn genially. “Well, let’s 
see how you’ve done! Blaise ... what have you got for 
me?” 

Slowly, Slughorn moved around the room, examining 
the various antidotes. Nobody had finished the task, 
although Hermione was trying to cram a few more 
ingredients into her bottle before Slughorn reached 
her. Ron had given up completely, and was merely 
trying to avoid breathing in the putrid fumes issuing 
from his cauldron. Harry stood there waiting, the 
bezoar clutched in a slightly sweaty hand. 

Slughorn reached their table last. He sniffed Ernie’s 
potion and passed on to Ron’s with a grimace. He did 
not linger over Ron’s cauldron, but backed away 
swiftly, retching slightly. 

“And you, Harry,” he said. “What have you got to 
show me?” 

Harry held out his hand, the bezoar sitting on his 
palm. 

Slughorn looked down at it for a full ten seconds. 
Harry wondered, for a moment, whether he was going 
to shout at him. Then he threw back his head and 
roared with laughter. 

“You’ve got nerve, boy!” he boomed, taking the bezoar 
and holding it up so that the class could see it. “Oh, 
you’re like your mother. ... Well, I can’t fault you. ... A 
bezoar would certainly act as an antidote to all these 
potions!” 

Page | 425 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione, who was sweaty-faced and had soot on her 
nose, looked livid. Her half-finished antidote, 
comprising fifty-two ingredients, including a chunk of 
her own hair, bubbled sluggishly behind Slughorn, 
who had eyes for nobody but Harry. 

“And you thought of a bezoar all by yourself, did you, 
Harry?” she asked through gritted teeth. 

“That’s the individual spirit a real potion-maker 
needs!” said Slughorn happily, before Harry could 
reply. “Just like his mother, she had the same 
intuitive grasp of potion-making, it’s undoubtedly 
from Lily he gets it. ... Yes, Harry, yes, if you’ve got a 
bezoar to hand, of course that would do the trick . . . 
although as they don’t work on everything, and are 
pretty rare, it’s still worth knowing how to mix 
antidotes. ...” 

The only person in the room looking angrier than 
Hermione was Malfoy, who, Harry was pleased to see, 
had spilled something that looked like cat-sick over 
himself. Before either of them could express their fury 
that Harry had come top of the class by not doing any 
work, however, the bell rang. 

“Time to pack up!” said Slughorn. “And an extra ten 
points to Gryffindor for sheer cheek!” 

Still chuckling, he waddled back to his desk at the 
front of the dungeon. 

Harry dawdled behind, taking an inordinate amount 
of time to do up his bag. Neither Ron nor Hermione 
wished him luck as they left; both looked rather 
annoyed. At last Harry and Slughorn were the only 
two left in the room. 



Page | 426 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Come on, now, Harry, you’ll be late for your next 
lesson,” said Slughorn affably, snapping the gold 
clasps shut on his dragon- skin briefcase. 

“Sir,” said Harry, reminding himself irresistibly of 
Voldemort, “I wanted to ask you something.” 

“Ask away, then, my dear boy, ask away. ...” 

“Sir, I wondered what you know about . . . about 
Horcruxes?” 

Slughorn froze. His round face seemed to sink in 
upon itself. He licked his lips and said hoarsely, 

“What did you say?” 

“I asked whether you know anything about 
Horcruxes, sir. You see — ” 

“Dumbledore put you up to this,” whispered 
Slughorn. His voice had changed completely. It was 
not genial anymore, but shocked, terrified. He 
fumbled in his breast pocket and pulled out a 
handkerchief, mopping his sweating brow. 
“Dumbledore’s shown you that — that memory. Well? 
Hasn’t he?” 

“Yes,” said Harry, deciding on the spot that it was 
best not to lie. 

“Yes, of course,” said Slughorn quietly, still dabbing 
at his white face. “Of course ... well, if you’ve seen 
that memory, Harry, you’ll know that I don’t know 
anything — anything” — he repeated the word 
forcefully — “about Horcruxes.” 

He seized his dragon-skin briefcase, stuffed his 
handkerchief back into his pocket, and marched to 
the dungeon door. 

Page | 427 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Sir,” said Harry desperately, “I just thought there 
might be a bit more to the memory — ” 

“Did you?” said Slughorn. “Then you were wrong, 
weren’t you? WRONG!” 

He bellowed the last word and, before Harry could say 
another word, slammed the dungeon door behind 
him. 

Neither Ron nor Hermione was at all sympathetic 
when Harry told them of this disastrous interview. 
Hermione was still seething at the way Harry had 
triumphed without doing the work properly. Ron was 
resentful that Harry hadn’t slipped him a bezoar too. 

“It would’ve just looked stupid if we’d both done it!” 
said Harry irritably. “Look, I had to try and soften him 
up so I could ask him about Voldemort, didn’t I? Oh, 
will you get a grip\” he added in exasperation, as Ron 
winced at the sound of the name. 

Infuriated by his failure and by Ron’s and Hermione’s 
attitudes, Harry brooded for the next few days over 
what to do next about Slughorn. He decided that, for 
the time being, he would let Slughorn think that he 
had forgotten all about Horcruxes; it was surely best 
to lull him into a false sense of security before 
returning to the attack. 

When Harry did not question Slughorn again, the 
Potions master reverted to his usual affectionate 
treatment of him, and appeared to have put the 
matter from his mind. Harry awaited an invitation to 
one of his little evening parties, determined to accept 
this time, even if he had to reschedule Quidditch 
practice. Unfortunately, however, no such invitation 
arrived. Harry checked with Hermione and Ginny: 
Neither of them had received an invitation and nor, as 
Page | 428 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




far as they knew, had anybody else. Harry could not 
help wondering whether this meant that Slughorn 
was not quite as forgetful as he appeared, simply 
determined to give Harry no additional opportunities 
to question him. 

Meanwhile, the Hogwarts library had failed Hermione 
for the first time in living memory. She was so 
shocked, she even forgot that she was annoyed at 
Harry for his trick with the bezoar. 

“I haven’t found one single explanation of what 
Horcruxes do!” she told him. “Not a single one! I’ve 
been right through the restricted section and even in 
the most horrible books, where they tell you how to 
brew the most gruesome potions — nothing! All I 
could find was this, in the introduction to Magick 
Moste Evile — listen — ‘Of the Horcrux, wickedest of 
magical inventions, we shall not speak nor give 
direction. ...’I mean, why mention it then?” she said 
impatiently, slamming the old book shut; it let out a 
ghostly wail. “Oh, shut up,” she snapped, stuffing it 
back into her bag. 

The snow melted around the school as February 
arrived, to be replaced by cold, dreary wetness. 
Purplish-gray clouds hung low over the castle and a 
constant fall of chilly rain made the lawns slippery 
and muddy. The upshot of this was that the sixth 
years’ first Apparition lesson, which was scheduled 
for a Saturday morning so that no normal lessons 
would be missed, took place in the Great Hall instead 
of in the grounds. 

When Harry and Hermione arrived in the Hall (Ron 
had come down with Lavender), they found that the 
tables had disappeared. Rain lashed against the high 
windows and the enchanted ceiling swirled darkly 
above them as they assembled in front of Professors 
Page | 429 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




McGonagall, Snape, Flitwick, and Sprout — the 
Heads of Houses — and a small wizard whom Harry 
took to be the Apparition instructor from the Ministry. 
He was oddly colorless, with transparent eyelashes, 
wispy hair, and an insubstantial air, as though a 
single gust of wind might blow him away. Harry 
wondered whether constant disappearances and 
reappearances had somehow diminished his 
substance, or whether this frail build was ideal for 
anyone wishing to vanish. 

“Good morning,” said the Ministry wizard, when all 
the students had arrived and the Heads of Houses 
had called for quiet. “My name is Wilkie Twycross and 
I shall be your Ministry Apparition instructor for the 
next twelve weeks. I hope to be able to prepare you for 
your Apparition Tests in this time — ” 

“Malfoy, be quiet and pay attention!” barked Professor 
McGonagall. 

Everybody looked around. Malfoy had flushed a dull 
pink; he looked furious as he stepped away from 
Crabbe, with whom he appeared to have been having 
a whispered argument. Harry glanced quickly at 
Snape, who also looked annoyed, though Harry 
strongly suspected that this was less because of 
Malfoy’s rudeness than the fact that McGonagall had 
reprimanded one of his House. 

“ — by which time, many of you may be ready to take 
your tests,” Twycross continued, as though there had 
been no interruption. 

“As you may know, it is usually impossible to 
Apparate or Disapparate within Hogwarts. The 
headmaster has lifted this enchantment, purely 
within the Great Hall, for one hour, so as to enable 
you to practice. May I emphasize that you will not be 
Page | 430 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




able to Apparate outside the walls of this Hall, and 
that you would be unwise to try. 

“I would like each of you to place yourselves now so 
that you have a clear five feet of space in front of 
you.” 

There was a great scrambling and jostling as people 
separated, banged into each other, and ordered 
others out of their space. The Heads of Houses moved 
among the students, marshaling them into position 
and breaking up arguments. 

“Harry, where are you going?” demanded Hermione. 

But Harry did not answer; he was moving quickly 
through the crowd, past the place where Professor 
Flitwick was making squeaky attempts to position a 
few Ravenclaws, all of whom wanted to be near the 
front, past Professor Sprout, who was chivying the 
Hufflepuffs into line, until, by dodging around Ernie 
Macmillan, he managed to position himself right at 
the back of the crowd, directly behind Malfoy, who 
was taking advantage of the general upheaval to 
continue his argument with Crabbe, standing five feet 
away and looking mutinous. 

“I don’t know how much longer, all right?” Malfoy 
shot at him, oblivious to Harry standing right behind 
him. “It’s taking longer than I thought it would.” 

Crabbe opened his mouth, but Malfoy appeared to 
second-guess what he was going to say. “Look, it’s 
none of your business what I’m doing, Crabbe, you 
and Goyle just do as you’re told and keep a lookout!” 

“I tell my friends what I’m up to, if I want them to 
keep a lookout for me,” Harry said, just loud enough 
for Malfoy to hear him. 

Page | 431 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




Malfoy spun around on the spot, his hand flying to 
his wand, but at that precise moment the four Heads 
of House shouted, “Quiet!” and silence fell again. 
Malfoy turned slowly to face the front again. 

“Thank you,” said Twycross. “Now then ...” 

He waved his wand. Old-fashioned wooden hoops 
instantly appeared on the floor in front of every 
student. 

“The important things to remember when Apparating 
are the three D’s!” said Twycross. “Destination, 
Determination, Deliberation! 

“Step one: Fix your mind firmly upon the desired 
destination,” said Twycross. “In this case, the interior 
of your hoop. Kindly concentrate upon that 
destination now.” 

Everybody looked around furtively to check that 
everyone else was staring into their hoop, then hastily 
did as they were told. Harry gazed at the circular 
patch of dusty floor enclosed by his hoop and tried 
hard to think of nothing else. This proved impossible, 
as he couldn’t stop puzzling over what Malfoy was 
doing that needed lookouts. 

“Step two,” said Twycross, “focus your determination 
to occupy the visualized space! Let your yearning to 
enter it flood from your mind to every particle of your 
body!” 

Harry glanced around surreptitiously. A little way to 
his left, Ernie Macmillan was contemplating his hoop 
so hard that his face had turned pink; it looked as 
though he was straining to lay a Quaffle-sized egg. 
Harry bit back a laugh and hastily returned his gaze 
to his own hoop. 

Page | 432 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Step three,” called Twycross, “and only when I give 
the command ... Turn on the spot, feeling your way 
into nothingness, moving with deliberation ,! On my 
command, now . . . one — ” 

Harry glanced around again; lots of people were 
looking positively alarmed at being asked to Apparate 
so quickly. 

“— two — ” 

Harry tried to fix his thoughts on his hoop again; he 
had already forgotten what the three D’s stood for. 

THREE!” 

Harry spun on the spot, lost balance, and nearly fell 
over. He was not the only one. The whole Hall was 
suddenly full of staggering people; Neville was flat on 
his back; Ernie Macmillan, on the other hand, had 
done a kind of pirouetting leap into his hoop and 
looked momentarily thrilled, until he caught sight of 
Dean Thomas roaring with laughter at him. 

“Never mind, never mind,” said Twycross dryly, who 
did not seem to have expected anything better. 

“Adjust your hoops, please, and back to your original 
positions. ...” 

The second attempt was no better than the first. The 
third was just as bad. Not until the fourth did 
anything exciting happen. There was a horrible 
screech of pain and everybody looked around, 
terrified, to see Susan Bones of Hufflepuff wobbling in 
her hoop with her left leg still standing five feet away 
where she had started. 

The Heads of House converged on her; there was a 
great bang and a puff of purple smoke, which cleared 

Page | 433 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




to reveal Susan sobbing, reunited with her leg but 
looking horrified. 



“Splinching, or the separation of random body parts,” 
said Wilkie Twycross dispassionately, “occurs when 
the mind is insufficiently determined. You must 
concentrate continuously upon your destination , and 
move, without haste, but with deliberation ... thus.” 

Twycross stepped forward, turned gracefully on the 
spot with his arms outstretched, and vanished in a 
swirl of robes, reappearing at the back of the Hall. 

“Remember the three D’s,” he said, “and try again ... 
one — two — three — ” 

But an hour later, Susan’s Splinching was still the 
most interesting thing that had happened. Twycross 
did not seem discouraged. Fastening his cloak at his 
neck, he merely said, “Until next Saturday, 
everybody, and do not forget: Destination. 
Determination. Deliberation.” 

With that, he waved his wand, Vanishing the hoops, 
and walked out of the Hall accompanied by Professor 
McGonagall. Talk broke out at once as people began 
moving toward the entrance hall. 

“How did you do?” asked Ron, hurrying toward Harry. 
“I think I felt something the last time I tried — a kind 
of tingling in my feet.” 

“I expect your trainers are too small, Won-Won,” said 
a voice behind them, and Hermione stalked past, 
smirking. 

“I didn’t feel anything,” said Harry, ignoring this 
interruption. “But I don’t care about that now — ” 

Page | 434 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“What d’you mean, you don’t care? Don’t you want to 
learn to Apparate?” said Ron incredulously. 

“I’m not fussed, really, I prefer flying,” said Harry, 
glancing over his shoulder to see where Malfoy was, 
and speeding up as they came into the entrance hall. 
“Look, hurry up, will you, there’s something I want to 
do. ...” 

Perplexed, Ron followed Harry back to the Gryffindor 
Tower at a run. They were temporarily detained by 
Peeves, who had jammed a door on the fourth floor 
shut and was refusing to let anyone pass until they 
set fire to their own pants, but Harry and Ron simply 
turned back and took one of their trusted shortcuts. 
Within five minutes, they were climbing through the 
portrait hole. 

“Are you going to tell me what we’re doing, then?” 
asked Ron, panting slightly. 

“Up here,” said Harry, and he crossed the common 
room and led the way through the door to the boys’ 
staircase. 

Their dormitory was, as Harry had hoped, empty. He 
flung open his trunk and began to rummage in it, 
while Ron watched impatiently. 

“Harry ...” 

“Malfoy ’s using Crabbe and Goyle as lookouts. He was 
arguing with Crabbe just now. I want to know — 
aha.” 

He had found it, a folded square of apparently blank 
parchment, which he now smoothed out and tapped 
with the tip of his wand. 



Page | 435 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I solemnly swear that I am up to no good ... or Malfoy 
is anyway.” 

At once, the Marauder’s Map appeared on the 
parchment’s surface. Here was a detailed plan of 
every one of the castle’s floors and, moving around it, 
the tiny, labeled black dots that signified each of the 
castle’s occupants. 

“Help me find Malfoy,” said Harry urgently. 

He laid the map upon his bed, and he and Ron leaned 
over it, searching. 

“There!” said Ron, after a minute or so. “He’s in the 
Slytherin common room, look . . . with Parkinson and 
Zabini and Crabbe and Goyle ...” 

Harry looked down at the map, disappointed, but 
rallied almost at once. 

“Well, I’m keeping an eye on him from now on,” he 
said firmly. “And the moment I see him lurking 
somewhere with Crabbe and Goyle keeping watch 
outside, it’ll be on with the old Invisibility Cloak and 
off to find out what he’s — ” 

He broke off as Neville entered the dormitory, bringing 
with him a strong smell of singed material, and began 
rummaging in his trunk for a fresh pair of pants. 

Despite his determination to catch Malfoy out, Harry 
had no luck at all over the next couple of weeks. 
Although he consulted the map as often as he could, 
sometimes making unnecessary visits to the 
bathroom between lessons to search it, he did not 
once see Malfoy anywhere suspicious. Admittedly, he 
spotted Crabbe and Goyle moving around the castle 
on their own more often than usual, sometimes 
Page | 436 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




remaining stationary in deserted corridors, but at 
these times Malfoy was not only nowhere near them, 
but impossible to locate on the map at all. This was 
most mysterious. Harry toyed with the possibility that 
Malfoy was actually leaving the school grounds, but 
could not see how he could be doing it, given the very 
high level of security now operating within the castle. 
He could only suppose that he was missing Malfoy 
amongst the hundreds of tiny black dots upon the 
map. As for the fact that Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle 
appeared to be going their different ways when they 
were usually inseparable, these things happened as 
people got older — Ron and Hermione, Harry reflected 
sadly, were living proof. 

February moved toward March with no change in the 
weather except that it became windy as well as wet. 

To general indignation, a sign went up on all common 
room notice boards that the next trip into Hogsmeade 
had been canceled. Ron was furious. 

“It was on my birthday!” he said. “I was looking 
forward to that!” 

“Not a big surprise, though, is it?” said Harry. “Not 
after what happened to Katie.” 

She had still not returned from St. Mungo’s. What 
was more, further disappearances had been reported 
in the Daily Prophet, including several relatives of 
students at Hogwarts. 

“But now all I’ve got to look forward to is stupid 
Apparition!” said Ron grumpily. “Big birthday treat ...” 

Three lessons on, Apparition was proving as difficult 
as ever, though a few more people had managed to 
Splinch themselves. Frustration was running high 
and there was a certain amount of ill-feeling toward 

Page | 437 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Wilkie Twycross and his three D’s, which had inspired 
a number of nicknames for him, the politest of which 
were Dogbreath and Dunghead. 

“Happy birthday, Ron,” said Harry, when they were 
woken on the first of March by Seamus and Dean 
leaving noisily for breakfast. “Have a present.” 

He threw the package across onto Ron’s bed, where it 
joined a small pile of them that must, Harry assumed, 
have been delivered by house-elves in the night. 

“Cheers,” said Ron drowsily and, as he ripped off the 
paper, Harry got out of bed, opened his own trunk, 
and began rummaging in it for the Marauder’s Map, 
which he hid after every use. He turfed out half the 
contents of his trunk before he found it hiding 
beneath the rolled-up socks in which he was still 
keeping his bottle of lucky potion, Felix Felicis. 

“Right,” he murmured, taking it back to bed with him, 
tapping it quietly and murmuring, “ I solemnly swear 
that I am up to no good,” so that Neville, who was 
passing the foot of his bed at the time, would not 
hear. 

“Nice one, Harry!” said Ron enthusiastically, waving 
the new pair of Quidditch Keeper’s gloves Harry had 
given him. 

“No problem,” said Harry absentmindedly, as he 
searched the Slytherin dormitory closely for Malfoy. 
“Hey ... I don’t think he’s in his bed. ...” 

Ron did not answer; he was too busy unwrapping 
presents, every now and then letting out an 
exclamation of pleasure. 



Page | 438 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Seriously good haul this year!” he announced, 
holding up a heavy gold watch with odd symbols 
around the edge and tiny moving stars instead of 
hands. “See what Mum and Dad got me? Blimey, I 
think I’ll come of age next year too. ...” 

“Cool,” muttered Harry, sparing the watch a glance 
before peering more closely at the map. Where was 
Malfoy? He did not seem to be at the Slytherin table 
in the Great Hall, eating breakfast. ... He was 
nowhere near Snape, who was sitting in his study. ... 
He wasn’t in any of the bathrooms or in the hospital 
wing. ... 

“Want one?” said Ron thickly, holding out a box of 
Chocolate Cauldrons. 

“No thanks,” said Harry, looking up. “Malfoy’s gone 
again!” 

“Can’t have done,” said Ron, stuffing a second 
Cauldron into his mouth as he slid out of bed to get 
dressed. “Come on, if you don’t hurry up, you’ll have 
to Apparate on an empty stomach. ... Might make it 
easier, I suppose ...” Ron looked thoughtfully at the 
box of Chocolate Cauldrons, then shrugged and 
helped himself to a third. 

Harry tapped the map with his wand, muttered, 
“Mischief managed,” though it hadn’t been, and got 
dressed, thinking hard. There had to be an 
explanation for Malfoy’s periodic disappearances, but 
he simply could not think what it could be. The best 
way of finding out would be to tail him, but even with 
the Invisibility Cloak this was an impractical idea: 
Harry had lessons, Quidditch practice, homework, 
and Apparition; he could not follow Malfoy around 
school all day without his absence being remarked 
upon. 

Page | 439 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Ready?” he said to Ron. 

He was halfway to the dormitory door when he 
realized that Ron had not moved, but was leaning on 
his bedpost, staring out of the rain-washed window 
with a strangely unfocused look on his face. 

“Ron? Breakfast.” 

“I’m not hungry.” 

Harry stared at him. 

“I thought you just said — ?” 

“Well, all right, I’ll come down with you,” sighed Ron, 
“but I don’t want to eat.” 

Harry scrutinized him suspiciously. 

“You’ve just eaten half a box of Chocolate Cauldrons, 
haven’t you?” 

“It’s not that,” Ron sighed again. “You ... you wouldn’t 
understand.” 

“Fair enough,” said Harry, albeit puzzled, as he 
turned to open the door. 

“Harry!” said Ron suddenly. 

“What?” 

“Harry, I can’t stand it!” 

“You can’t stand what?” asked Harry, now starting to 
feel definitely alarmed. Ron was rather pale and 
looked as though he was about to be sick. 



Page | 440 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I can’t stop thinking about her!” said Ron hoarsely. 

Harry gaped at him. He had not expected this and 
was not sure he wanted to hear it. Friends they might 
be, but if Ron started calling Lavender “Lav-Lav,” he 
would have to put his foot down. 

“Why does that stop you having breakfast?” Harry 
asked, trying to inject a note of common sense into 
the proceedings. 

“I don’t think she knows I exist,” said Ron with a 
desperate gesture. 

“She definitely knows you exist,” said Harry, 
bewildered. “She keeps snogging you, doesn’t she?” 

Ron blinked. “Who are you talking about?” 

“Who are you talking about?” said Harry, with an 
increasing sense that all reason had dropped out of 
the conversation. 

“Romilda Vane,” said Ron softly, and his whole face 
seemed to illuminate as he said it, as though hit by a 
ray of purest sunlight. 

They stared at each other for almost a whole minute, 
before Harry said, “This is a joke, right? You’re 
joking.” 

“I think ... Harry, I think I love her,” said Ron in a 
strangled voice. 

“Okay,” said Harry, walking up to Ron to get a better 
look at the glazed eyes and the pallid complexion, 
“okay... Say that again with a straight face.” 



Page | 441 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I love her,” repeated Ron breathlessly. “Have you 
seen her hair, it’s all black and shiny and silky ... and 
her eyes? Her big dark eyes? And her — ” 

“This is really funny and everything,” said Harry 
impatiently, “but joke’s over, all right? Drop it.” 

He turned to leave; he had got two steps toward the 
door when a crashing blow hit him on the right ear. 
Staggering, he looked around. Ron’s fist was drawn 
right back; his face was contorted with rage; he was 
about to strike again. 

Harry reacted instinctively; his wand was out of his 
pocket and the incantation sprang to mind without 
conscious thought: Levicorpus\ 

Ron yelled as his heel was wrenched upward once 
more; he dangled helplessly, upside down, his robes 
hanging off him. 

“ What was that for?” Harry bellowed. 

“You insulted her, Harry! You said it was a joke!” 
shouted Ron, who was slowly turning purple in the 
face as all the blood rushed to his head. 

“This is insane!” said Harry. “What’s got into — ?” 

And then he saw the box lying open on Ron’s bed, 
and the truth hit him with the force of a stampeding 
troll. 

“Where did you get those Chocolate Cauldrons?” 

“They were a birthday present!” shouted Ron, 
revolving slowly in midair as he struggled to get free. 

“I offered you one, didn’t I?” 



Page | 442 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You just picked them up off the floor, didn’t you?” 



“They’d fallen off my bed, all right? Let me go!” 

“They didn’t fall off your bed, you prat, don’t you 
understand? They were mine, I chucked them out of 
my trunk when I was looking for the map, they’re the 
Chocolate Cauldrons Romilda gave me before 
Christmas, and they’re all spiked with love potion!” 

But only one word of this seemed to have registered 
with Ron. 

“Romilda?” he repeated. “Did you say Romilda? Harry 
— do you know her? Can you introduce me?” 

Harry stared at the dangling Ron, whose face now 
looked tremendously hopeful, and fought a strong 
desire to laugh. A part of him — the part closest to 
his throbbing right ear — was quite keen on the idea 
of letting Ron down and watching him run amok until 
the effects of the potion wore off. . . . But on the other 
hand, they were supposed to be friends, Ron had not 
been himself when he had attacked, and Harry 
thought that he would deserve another punching if he 
permitted Ron to declare undying love for Romilda 
Vane. 

“Yeah, I’ll introduce you,” said Harry, thinking fast. 
“I’m going to let you down now, okay?” 

He sent Ron crashing back to the floor (his ear did 
hurt quite a lot), but Ron simply bounded to his feet 
again, grinning. 

“She’ll be in Slughorn’s office,” said Harry confidently, 
leading the way to the door. 



Page | 443 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Why will she be in there?” asked Ron anxiously, 
hurrying to keep up. 

“Oh, she has extra Potions lessons with him,” said 
Harry, inventing wildly. 

“Maybe I could ask if I can have them with her?” said 
Ron eagerly. 

“Great idea,” said Harry. 

Lavender was waiting beside the portrait hole, a 
complication Harry had not foreseen. 

“You’re late, Won-Won!” she pouted. “I’ve got you a 
birthday — ” 

“Leave me alone,” said Ron impatiently. “Harry’s going 
to introduce me to Romilda Vane.” 

And without another word to her, he pushed his way 
out of the portrait hole. Harry tried to make an 
apologetic face to Lavender, but it might have turned 
out simply amused, because she looked more 
offended than ever as the Fat Lady swung shut 
behind them. 

Harry had been slightly worried that Slughorn might 
be at breakfast, but he answered his office door at the 
first knock, wearing a green velvet dressing gown and 
matching nightcap and looking rather bleary-eyed. 

“Harry,” he mumbled. “This is very early for a call. ... I 
generally sleep late on a Saturday. ...” 

“Professor, I’m really sorry to disturb you,” said Harry 
as quietly as possible, while Ron stood on tiptoe, 
attempting to see past Slughorn into his room, “but 
my friend Ron’s swallowed a love potion by mistake. 

Page | 444 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




You couldn’t make him an antidote, could you? I’d 
take him to Madam Pomfrey, but we’re not supposed 
to have anything from Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes and, 
you know ... awkward questions ...” 

“I’d have thought you could have whipped him up a 
remedy, Harry, an expert potioneer like you?” asked 
Slughorn. 

“Er,” said Harry, somewhat distracted by the fact that 
Ron was now elbowing him in the ribs in an attempt 
to force his way into the room, “well, I’ve never mixed 
an antidote for a love potion, sir, and by the time I get 
it right, Ron might’ve done something serious — ” 

Helpfully, Ron chose this moment to moan, “I can’t 
see her, Harry — is he hiding her?” 

“Was this potion within date?” asked Slughorn, now 
eyeing Ron with professional interest. “They can 
strengthen, you know, the longer they’re kept.” 

“That would explain a lot,” panted Harry, now 
positively wrestling with Ron to keep him from 
knocking Slughorn over. “It’s his birthday, Professor,” 
he added imploringly. 

“Oh, all right, come in, then, come in,” said Slughorn, 
relenting. “I’ve got the necessary here in my bag, it’s 
not a difficult antidote. ...” 

Ron burst through the door into Slughorn ’s 
overheated, crowded study, tripped over a tasseled 
footstool, regained his balance by seizing Harry 
around the neck, and muttered, “She didn’t see that, 
did she?” 



Page | 445 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“She’s not here yet,” said Harry, watching Slughorn 
opening his potion kit and adding a few pinches of 
this and that to a small crystal bottle. 

“That’s good,” said Ron fervently. “How do I look?” 

“Very handsome,” said Slughorn smoothly, handing 
Ron a glass of clear liquid. “Now drink that up, it’s a 
tonic for the nerves, keep you calm when she arrives, 
you know.” 

“Brilliant,” said Ron eagerly, and he gulped the 
antidote down noisily. 

Harry and Slughorn watched him. For a moment, Ron 
beamed at them. Then, very slowly, his grin sagged 
and vanished, to be replaced by an expression of 
utmost horror. 

“Back to normal, then?” said Harry, grinning. 
Slughorn chuckled. “Thanks a lot, Professor.” 

“Don’t mention it, m’boy, don’t mention it,” said 
Slughorn, as Ron collapsed into a nearby armchair, 
looking devastated. “Pick-me-up, that’s what he 
needs,” Slughorn continued, now bustling over to a 
table loaded with drinks. “I’ve got butterbeer, I’ve got 
wine, I’ve got one last bottle of this oak-matured mead 
. . . hmm . . . meant to give that to Dumbledore for 
Christmas ... ah, well ...” He shrugged. “He can’t miss 
what he’s never had! Why don’t we open it now and 
celebrate Mr. Weasley’s birthday? Nothing like a fine 
spirit to chase away the pangs of disappointed love. 



He chortled again, and Harry joined in. This was the 
first time he had found himself almost alone with 
Slughorn since his disastrous first attempt to extract 
the true memory from him. Perhaps, if he could just 

Page | 446 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




keep Slughorn in a good mood . . . perhaps if they got 
through enough of the oak-matured mead . . . 

“There you are then,” said Slughorn, handing Harry 
and Ron a glass of mead each before raising his own. 
“Well, a very happy birthday, Ralph — ” 

“Ron — ” whispered Harry. 

But Ron, who did not appear to be listening to the 
toast, had already thrown the mead into his mouth 
and swallowed it. 

There was one second, hardly more than a heartbeat, 
in which Harry knew there was something terribly 
wrong and Slughorn, it seemed, did not. 

“ — and may you have many more — ” 

“Ron\” 

Ron had dropped his glass; he half-rose from his 
chair and then crumpled, his extremities jerking 
uncontrollably. Foam was dribbling from his mouth, 
and his eyes were bulging from their sockets. 

“Professor!” Harry bellowed. “Do something!” 

But Slughorn seemed paralyzed by shock. Ron 
twitched and choked: His skin was turning blue. 

“What — but — ” spluttered Slughorn. 

Harry leapt over a low table and sprinted toward 
Slughorn ’s open potion kit, pulling out jars and 
pouches, while the terrible sound of Ron’s gargling 
breath filled the room. Then he found it — the 
shriveled kidneylike stone Slughorn had taken from 
him in Potions. 

Page | 447 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




He hurtled back to Ron’s side, wrenched open his 
jaw, and thrust the bezoar into his mouth. Ron gave a 
great shudder, a rattling gasp, and his body became 
limp and still. 



Page | 448 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 








ELF TAILS 

“So, all in all, not one of Ron’s better birthdays?” said 
Fred. 

It was evening; the hospital wing was quiet, the 
windows curtained, the lamps lit. Ron’s was the only 
occupied bed. Harry, Hermione, and Ginny were 
sitting around him; they had spent all day waiting 
outside the double doors, trying to see inside 
whenever somebody went in or out. Madam Pomfrey 
had only let them enter at eight o’clock. Fred and 
George had arrived at ten past. 

“This isn’t how we imagined handing over our 
present,” said George grimly, putting down a large 
wrapped gift on Ron’s bedside cabinet and sitting 
beside Ginny. 

“Yeah, when we pictured the scene, he was 
conscious,” said Fred. 

“There we were in Hogsmeade, waiting to surprise 
him — ” said George. 

Page | 449 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



“You were in Hogsmeade?” asked Ginny, looking up. 

“We were thinking of buying Zonko’s,” said Fred 
gloomily. “A Hogsmeade branch, you know, but a fat 
lot of good it’ll do us if you lot aren’t allowed out at 
weekends to buy our stuff anymore. ... But never 
mind that now.” 

He drew up a chair beside Harry and looked at Ron’s 
pale face. 

“How exactly did it happen, Harry?” 

Harry retold the story he had already recounted, it felt 
like a hundred times to Dumbledore, to McGonagall, 
to Madam Pomfrey, to Hermione, and to Ginny. 

"... and then I got the bezoar down his throat and his 
breathing eased up a bit, Slughorn ran for help, 
McGonagall and Madam Pomfrey turned up, and they 
brought Ron up here. They reckon he’ll be all right. 
Madam Pomfrey says hell have to stay here a week or 
so ... keep taking essence of rue ...” 

“Blimey, it was lucky you thought of a bezoar,” said 
George in a low voice. 

“Lucky there was one in the room,” said Harry, who 
kept turning cold at the thought of what would have 
happened if he had not been able to lay hands on the 
little stone. 

Hermione gave an almost inaudible sniff. She had 
been exceptionally quiet all day. Having hurtled, 
white-faced, up to Harry outside the hospital wing 
and demanded to know what had happened, she had 
taken almost no part in Harry and Ginny’s obsessive 
discussion about how Ron had been poisoned, but 
merely stood beside them, clench-jawed and 
Page | 450 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




frightened-looking, until at last they had been allowed 
in to see him. 

“Do Mum and Dad know?” Fred asked Ginny. 

“They’ve already seen him, they arrived an hour ago 
— they’re in Dumbledore’s office now, but they’ll be 
back soon. ...” 

There was a pause while they all watched Ron 
mumble a little in his sleep. 

“So the poison was in the drink?” said Fred quietly. 

“Yes,” said Harry at once; he could think of nothing 
else and was glad for the opportunity to start 
discussing it again. “Slughorn poured it out — ” 

“Would he have been able to slip something into Ron’s 
glass without you seeing?” 

“Probably,” said Harry, “but why would Slughorn 
want to poison Ron?” 

“No idea,” said Fred, frowning. “You don’t think he 
could have mixed up the glasses by mistake? Meaning 
to get you?” 

“Why would Slughorn want to poison Harry?” asked 
Ginny. 

“I dunno,” said Fred, “but there must be loads of 
people who’d like to poison Harry, mustn’t there? The 
Chosen One’ and all that?” 

“So you think Slughorn ’s a Death Eater?” said Ginny. 
“Anything’s possible,” said Fred darkly. 



Page | 451 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“He could be under the Imperius Curse,” said George. 

“Or he could be innocent,” said Ginny. “The poison 
could have been in the bottle, in which case it was 
probably meant for Slughorn himself.” 

“Who’d want to kill Slughorn?” 

“Dumbledore reckons Voldemort wanted Slughorn on 
his side,” said Harry. “Slughorn was in hiding for a 
year before he came to Hogwarts. And ...” He thought 
of the memory Dumbledore had not yet been able to 
extract from Slughorn. “And maybe Voldemort wants 
him out of the way, maybe he thinks he could be 
valuable to Dumbledore.” 

“But you said Slughorn had been planning to give 
that bottle to Dumbledore for Christmas,” Ginny 
reminded him. “So the poisoner could just as easily 
have been after Dumbledore.” 

“Then the poisoner didn’t know Slughorn very well,” 
said Hermione, speaking for the first time in hours 
and sounding as though she had a bad head cold. 
“Anyone who knew Slughorn would have known there 
was a good chance he’d keep something that tasty for 
himself.” 

“Er-my-nee,” croaked Ron unexpectedly from between 
them. 

They all fell silent, watching him anxiously, but after 
muttering incomprehensibly for a moment he merely 
started snoring. 

The dormitory doors flew open, making them all 
jump: Hagrid came striding toward them, his hair 
rain-flecked, his bearskin coat flapping behind him, a 



Page | 452 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




crossbow in his hand, leaving a trail of muddy 
dolphin-sized footprints all over the floor. 

“Bin in the forest all day!” he panted. “Aragog’s worse, 
I bin readin’ to him — didn’ get up ter dinner till jus’ 
now an’ then Professor Sprout told me abou’ Ron! 

How is he?” 

“Not bad,” said Harry. “They say he’ll be okay.” 

“No more than six visitors at a time!” said Madam 
Pomfrey, hurrying out of her office. 

“Hagrid makes six,” George pointed out. 

“Oh ... yes ...” said Madam Pomfrey, who seemed to 
have been counting Hagrid as several people due to 
his vastness. To cover her confusion, she hurried off 
to clear up his muddy footprints with her wand. 

“I don’ believe this,” said Hagrid hoarsely, shaking his 
great shaggy head as he stared down at Ron. “Jus’ 
don’ believe it ... Look at him lyin’ there. ... Who’d 
want ter hurt him, eh?” 

“That’s just what we were discussing,” said Harry. 

“We don’t know.” 

“Someone couldn’ have a grudge against the 
Gryffindor Quidditch team, could they?” said Hagrid 
anxiously. “Firs’ Katie, now Ron ...” 

“I can’t see anyone trying to bump off a Quidditch 
team,” said George. 

“Wood might’ve done the Slytherins if he could’ve got 
away with it,” said Fred fairly. 



Page | 453 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, I don’t think it’s Quidditch, but I think there’s a 
connection between the attacks,” said Hermione 
quietly. 

“How d’you work that out?” asked Fred. 

“Well, for one thing, they both ought to have been 
fatal and weren’t, although that was pure luck. And 
for another, neither the poison nor the necklace 
seems to have reached the person who was supposed 
to be killed. Of course,” she added broodingly, “that 
makes the person behind this even more dangerous 
in a way, because they don’t seem to care how many 
people they finish off before they actually reach their 
victim.” 

Before anybody could respond to this ominous 
pronouncement, the dormitory doors opened again 
and Mr. and Mrs. Weasley hurried up the ward. They 
had done no more than satisfy themselves that Ron 
would make a full recovery on their last visit to the 
ward; now Mrs. Weasley seized hold of Harry and 
hugged him very tightly. “Dumbledore’s told us how 
you saved him with the bezoar,” she sobbed. “Oh, 
Harry, what can we say? You saved Ginny ... you 
saved Arthur ... now you’ve saved Ron ...” 

“Don’t be ... I didn’t ...” muttered Harry awkwardly. 

“Half our family does seem to owe you their lives, now 
I stop and think about it,” Mr. Weasley said in a 
constricted voice. “Well, all I can say is that it was a 
lucky day for the Weasleys when Ron decided to sit in 
your compartment on the Hogwarts Express, Harry.” 

Harry could not think of any reply to this and was 
almost glad when Madam Pomfrey reminded them 
that there were only supposed to be six visitors 
around Ron’s bed; he and Hermione rose at once to 

Page | 454 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




leave and Hagrid decided to go with them, leaving Ron 
with his family. 

“It’s terrible,” growled Hagrid into his beard, as the 
three of them walked back along the corridor to the 
marble staircase. “All this new security, an’ kids are 
still gettin’ hurt. ... Dumbledore’s worried sick. ... He 
don’ say much, but I can tell. ...” 

“Hasn’t he got any ideas, Hagrid?” asked Hermione 
desperately. 

“I ’spect he’s got hundreds of ideas, brain like his,” 
said Hagrid. “But he doesn’ know who sent that 
necklace nor put poison in that wine, or they’d ’ve bin 
caught, wouldn’ they? Wha’ worries me,” said Hagrid, 
lowering his voice and glancing over his shoulder 
(Harry, for good measure, checked the ceiling for 
Peeves), “is how long Hogwarts can stay open if kids 
are bein’ attacked. Chamber o’ Secrets all over again, 
isn’ it? There’ll be panic, more parents takin’ their 
kids outta school, an’ nex’ thing yeh know the board 
o’ governors ...” 

Hagrid stopped talking as the ghost of a long-haired 
woman drifted serenely past, then resumed in a 
hoarse whisper, "... the board o’ governors’ll be talkin’ 
about shuttin’ us up fer good.” 

“Surely not?” said Hermione, looking worried. 

“Gotta see it from their point o’ view,” said Hagrid 
heavily. “I mean, it’s always bin a bit of a risk sendin’ 
a kid ter Hogwarts, hasn’ it? Yer expect accidents, 
don’ yeh, with hundreds of underage wizards all 
locked up tergether, but attempted murder, tha’s 
diff’rent. ’S’no wonder Dumbledore’s angry with Sn — 



Page | 455 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid stopped in his tracks, a familiar, guilty 
expression on what was visible of his face above his 
tangled black beard. 

“What?” said Harry quickly. “Dumbledore’s angry with 
Snape?” 

“I never said tha’,” said Hagrid, though his look of 
panic could not have been a bigger giveaway. “Look at 
the time, it’s gettin’ on fer midnight, I need ter — ” 

“Hagrid, why is Dumbledore angry with Snape?” 

Harry asked loudly. 

“Shhhh!” said Hagrid, looking both nervous and 
angry. “Don’ shout stuff like that, Harry, d’yeh wan’ 
me ter lose me job? Mind, I don’ suppose yeh’d care, 
would yeh, not now yeh’ve given up Care of Mag — ” 

“Don’t try and make me feel guilty, it won’t work!” 
said Harry forcefully. “What’s Snape done?” 

“I dunno, Harry, I shouldn’ta heard it at all! I — well, I 
was cornin’ outta the forest the other evenin’ an’ I 
overheard ’em talking — well, arguin’. Didn’t like ter 
draw attention to meself, so I sorta skulked an’ tried 
not ter listen, but it was a — well, a heated discussion 
an’ it wasn’ easy ter block it out.” 

“Well?” Harry urged him, as Hagrid shuffled his 
enormous feet uneasily. 

“Well — I jus’ heard Snape sayin’ Dumbledore took 
too much fer granted an’ maybe he — Snape — didn’ 
wan’ ter do it anymore — ” 

“Do what?” 



Page | 456 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I dunno, Harry, it sounded like Snape was feelin’ a 
bit overworked, tha’s all — anyway, Dumbledore told 
him flat out he’d agreed ter do it an’ that was all there 
was to it. Pretty firm with him. An’ then he said 
summat abou’ Snape makin’ investigations in his 
House, in Slytherin. Well, there’s nothin’ strange 
abou’ that!” Hagrid added hastily, as Harry and 
Hermione exchanged looks full of meaning. “All the 
Heads o’ Houses were asked ter look inter that 
necklace business — ” 

“Yeah, but Dumbledore ’s not having rows with the 
rest of them, is he?” said Harry. 

“Look,” Hagrid twisted his crossbow uncomfortably in 
his hands; there was a loud splintering sound and it 
snapped in two. “I know what yeh’re like abou’ Snape, 
Harry, an’ I don’ want yeh ter go readin’ more inter 
this than there is.” 

“Look out,” said Hermione tersely. 

They turned just in time to see the shadow of Argus 
Filch looming over the wall behind them before the 
man himself turned the corner, hunchbacked, his 
jowls aquiver. 

“Oho!” he wheezed. “Out of bed so late, this’ll mean 
detention!” 

“No it won’, Filch,” said Hagrid shortly. “They’re with 
me, aren’ they?” 

“And what difference does that make?” asked Filch 
obnoxiously. 

“I’m a ruddy teacher, aren’ I, yeh sneakin’ Squib!” 
said Hagrid, firing up at once. 



Page | 457 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




There was a nasty hissing noise as Filch swelled with 
fury; Mrs. Norris had arrived, unseen, and was 
twisting herself sinuously around Filch’s skinny 
ankles. 

“Get goin’,” said Hagrid out of the corner of his 
mouth. 

Harry did not need telling twice; he and Hermione 
both hurried off; Hagrid’s and Filch’s raised voices 
echoed behind them as they ran. They passed Peeves 
near the turning into Gryffindor Tower, but he was 
streaking happily toward the source of the yelling, 
cackling and calling, 

When there’s strife and when there’s trouble 
Call on Peevsie, he’ll make double! 

The Fat Lady was snoozing and not pleased to be 
woken, but swung forward grumpily to allow them to 
clamber into the mercifully peaceful and empty 
common room. It did not seem that people knew 
about Ron yet; Harry was very relieved: He had been 
interrogated enough that day. Hermione bade him 
good night and set off for the girls’ dormitory. Harry, 
however, remained behind, taking a seat beside the 
fire and looking down into the dying embers. 

So Dumbledore had argued with Snape. In spite of all 
he had told Harry, in spite of his insistence that he 
trusted Snape completely, he had lost his temper with 
him. ... He did not think that Snape had tried hard 
enough to investigate the Slytherins ... or, perhaps, to 
investigate a single Slytherin: Malfoy? 

Was it because Dumbledore did not want Harry to do 
anything foolish, to take matters into his own hands, 
that he had pretended there was nothing in Harry’s 
suspicions? That seemed likely. It might even be that 

Page | 458 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore did not want anything to distract Harry 
from their lessons, or from procuring that memory 
from Slughorn. Perhaps Dumbledore did not think it 
right to confide suspicions about his staff to sixteen- 
year-olds. ... 

“There you are, Potter!” 

Harry jumped to his feet in shock, his wand at the 
ready. He had been quite convinced that the common 
room was empty; he had not been at all prepared for 
a hulking figure to rise suddenly out of a distant 
chair. A closer look showed him that it was Cormac 
McLaggen. 

“I’ve been waiting for you to come back,” said 
McLaggen, disregarding Harry’s drawn wand. 

“Must’ve fallen asleep. Look, I saw them taking 
Weasley up to the hospital wing earlier. Didn’t look 
like he’ll be fit for next week’s match.” 

It took Harry a few moments to realize what 
McLaggen was talking about. 

“Oh ... right ... Quidditch,” he said, putting his wand 
back into the belt of his jeans and running a hand 
wearily through his hair. “Yeah ... he might not make 
it.” 

“Well, then, I’ll be playing Keeper, won’t I?” said 
McLaggen. 

“Yeah,” said Harry. “Yeah, I suppose so. ...” 

He could not think of an argument against it; after 
all, McLaggen had certainly performed second-best in 
the trials. 



Page | 459 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Excellent,” said McLaggen in a satisfied voice. “So 
when’s practice?” 

“What? Oh ... there’s one tomorrow evening.” 

“Good. Listen, Potter, we should have a talk 
beforehand. I’ve got some ideas on strategy you might 
find useful.” 

“Right,” said Harry unenthusiastically. “Well, I’ll hear 
them tomorrow, then. I’m pretty tired now ... see you 



The news that Ron had been poisoned spread quickly 
next day, but it did not cause the sensation that 
Katie’s attack had done. People seemed to think that 
it might have been an accident, given that he had 
been in the Potions master’s room at the time, and 
that as he had been given an antidote immediately 
there was no real harm done. In fact, the Gryffindors 
were generally much more interested in the upcoming 
Quidditch match against Hufflepuff, for many of them 
wanted to see Zacharias Smith, who played Chaser on 
the Hufflepuff team, punished soundly for his 
commentary during the opening match against 
Slytherin. 

Harry, however, had never been less interested in 
Quidditch; he was rapidly becoming obsessed with 
Draco Malfoy. Still checking the Marauder’s Map 
whenever he got a chance, he sometimes made 
detours to wherever Malfoy happened to be, but had 
not yet detected him doing anything out of the 
ordinary. And still there were those inexplicable times 
when Malfoy simply vanished from the map. ... 

But Harry did not get a lot of time to consider the 
problem, what with Quidditch practice, homework, 



Page | 460 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




and the fact that he was now being dogged wherever 
he went by Cormac McLaggen and Lavender Brown. 

He could not decide which of them was more 
annoying. McLaggen kept up a constant stream of 
hints that he would make a better permanent Keeper 
for the team than Ron, and that now that Harry was 
seeing him play regularly he would surely come 
around to this way of thinking too; he was also keen 
to criticize the other players and provide Harry with 
detailed training schemes, so that more than once 
Harry was forced to remind him who was Captain. 

Meanwhile, Lavender kept sidling up to Harry to 
discuss Ron, which Harry found almost more wearing 
than McLaggen’s Quidditch lectures. At first, 

Lavender had been very annoyed that nobody had 
thought to tell her that Ron was in the hospital wing 
— “I mean, I am his girlfriend!” — but unfortunately 
she had now decided to forgive Harry this lapse of 
memory and was keen to have lots of in-depth chats 
with him about Ron’s feelings, a most uncomfortable 
experience that Harry would have happily forgone. 

“Look, why don’t you talk to Ron about all this?” 

Harry asked, after a particularly long interrogation 
from Lavender that took in everything from precisely 
what Ron had said about her new dress robes to 
whether or not Harry thought that Ron considered his 
relationship with Lavender to be “serious.” 

“Well, I would, but he’s always asleep when I go and 
see him!” said Lavender fretfully. 

“Is he?” said Harry, surprised, for he had found Ron 
perfectly alert every time he had been up to the 
hospital wing, both highly interested in the news of 
Dumbledore and Snape’s row and keen to abuse 
McLaggen as much as possible. 

Page | 461 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Is Hermione Granger still visiting him?” Lavender 
demanded suddenly. 

“Yeah, I think so. Well, they’re friends, aren’t they?” 
said Harry uncomfortably. 

“Friends, don’t make me laugh,” said Lavender 
scornfully. “She didn’t talk to him for weeks after he 
started going out with me! But I suppose she wants to 
make up with him now he’s all interesting. ...” 

“Would you call getting poisoned being interesting?” 
asked Harry. “Anyway — sorry, got to go — there’s 
McLaggen coming for a talk about Quidditch,” said 
Harry hurriedly, and he dashed sideways through a 
door pretending to be solid wall and sprinted down 
the shortcut that would take him off to Potions where, 
thankfully, neither Lavender nor McLaggen could 
follow him. 

On the morning of the Quidditch match against 
Hufflepuff, Harry dropped in on the hospital wing 
before heading down to the pitch. Ron was very 
agitated; Madam Pomfrey would not let him go down 
to watch the match, feeling it would overexcite him. 

“So how’s McLaggen shaping up?” he asked Harry 
nervously, apparently forgetting that he had already 
asked the same question twice. 

“I’ve told you,” said Harry patiently, “he could be 
world-class and I wouldn’t want to keep him. He 
keeps trying to tell everyone what to do, he thinks he 
could play every position better than the rest of us. I 
can’t wait to be shot of him. And speaking of getting 
shot of people,” Harry added, getting to his feet and 
picking up his Firebolt, “will you stop pretending to 
be asleep when Lavender comes to see you? She’s 
driving me mad as well.” 

Page | 462 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh,” said Ron, looking sheepish. “Yeah. All right.” 

“If you don’t want to go out with her anymore, just tell 
her,” said Harry. 

“Yeah ... well ... it’s not that easy, is it?” said Ron. He 
paused. “Hermione going to look in before the 
match?” he added casually. 

“No, she’s already gone down to the pitch with 
Ginny.” 

“Oh,” said Ron, looking rather glum. “Right. Well, 
good luck. Hope you hammer McLag — I mean, 
Smith.” 

“I’ll try,” said Harry, shouldering his broom. “See you 
after the match.” 

He hurried down through the deserted corridors; the 
whole school was outside, either already seated in the 
stadium or heading down toward it. He was looking 
out of the windows he passed, trying to gauge how 
much wind they were facing, when a noise ahead 
made him glance up and he saw Malfoy walking 
toward him, accompanied by two girls, both of whom 
looked sulky and resentful. 

Malfoy stopped short at the sight of Harry, then gave 
a short, humorless laugh and continued walking. 

“Where ’re you going?” Harry demanded. 

“Yeah, I’m really going to tell you, because it’s your 
business, Potter,” sneered Malfoy. “You’d better hurry 
up, they’ll be waiting for ‘the Chosen Captain’ — ‘the 
Boy Who Scored’ — whatever they call you these 
days.” 



Page | 463 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




One of the girls gave an unwilling giggle. Harry stared 
at her. She blushed. Malfoy pushed past Harry and 
she and her friend followed at a trot, turning the 
corner and vanishing from view. 

Harry stood rooted on the spot and watched them 
disappear. This was infuriating; he was already 
cutting it fine to get to the match on time and yet 
there was Malfoy, skulking off while the rest of the 
school was absent: Harry’s best chance yet of 
discovering what Malfoy was up to. The silent seconds 
trickled past, and Harry remained where he was, 
frozen, gazing at the place where Malfoy had 
vanished. ... 

“Where have you been?” demanded Ginny, as Harry 
sprinted into the changing rooms. The whole team 
was changed and ready; Coote and Peakes, the 
Beaters, were both hitting their clubs nervously 
against their legs. 

“I met Malfoy,” Harry told her quietly, as he pulled his 
scarlet robes over his head. 

“So?” 

“So I wanted to know how come he’s up at the castle 
with a couple of girlfriends while everyone else is 
down here. ...” 

“Does it matter right now?” 

“Well, I’m not likely to find out, am I?” said Harry, 
seizing his Firebolt and pushing his glasses straight. 
“Come on then!” 

And without another word, he marched out onto the 
pitch to deafening cheers and boos. 



Page | 464 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




There was little wind; the clouds were patchy; every 
now and then there were dazzling flashes of bright 
sunlight. 

“Tricky conditions!” McLaggen said bracingly to the 
team. “Coote, Peakes, you’ll want to fly out of the sun, 
so they don’t see you coming — ” 

“I’m the Captain, McLaggen, shut up giving them 
instructions,” said Harry angrily. “Just get up by the 
goal posts!” 

Once McLaggen had marched off, Harry turned to 
Coote and Peakes. 

“Make sure you do fly out of the sun,” he told them 
grudgingly. 

He shook hands with the Hufflepuff Captain, and 
then, on Madam Hooch’s whistle, kicked off and rose 
into the air, higher than the rest of his team, 
streaking around the pitch in search of the Snitch. If 
he could catch it good and early, there might be a 
chance he could get back up to the castle, seize the 
Marauder’s Map, and find out what Malfoy was doing. 



“And that’s Smith of Hufflepuff with the Quaffle,” said 
a dreamy voice, echoing over the grounds. “He did the 
commentary last time, of course, and Ginny Weasley 
flew into him, I think probably on purpose, it looked 
like it. Smith was being quite rude about Gryffindor, I 
expect he regrets that now he’s playing them — oh, 
look, he’s lost the Quaffle, Ginny took it from him, I 
do like her, she’s very nice. ...” 

Harry stared down at the commentator’s podium. 
Surely nobody in their right mind would have let 
Luna Lovegood commentate? But even from above 

Page | 465 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




there was no mistaking that long, dirty-blonde hair, 
nor the necklace of butterbeer corks. ... Beside Luna, 
Professor McGonagall was looking slightly 
uncomfortable, as though she was indeed having 
second thoughts about this appointment. 

"... but now that big Hufflepuff player’s got the 
Quaffle from her, I can’t remember his name, it’s 
something like Bibble — no, Buggins — ” 

“It’s Cadwallader!” said Professor McGonagall loudly 
from beside Luna. The crowd laughed. 

Harry stared around for the Snitch; there was no sign 
of it. Moments later, Cadwallader scored. McLaggen 
had been shouting criticism at Ginny for allowing the 
Quaffle out of her possession, with the result that he 
had not noticed the large red ball soaring past his 
right ear. 

“McLaggen, will you pay attention to what you’re 
supposed to be doing and leave everyone else alone!” 
bellowed Harry, wheeling around to face his Keeper. 

“You’re not setting a great example!” McLaggen 
shouted back, red-faced and furious. 

“And Harry Potter’s now having an argument with his 
Keeper,” said Luna serenely, while both Hufflepuffs 
and Slytherins below in the crowd cheered and jeered. 
“I don’t think that’ll help him find the Snitch, but 
maybe it’s a clever ruse. ...” 

Swearing angrily, Harry spun round and set off 
around the pitch again, scanning the skies for some 
sign of the tiny, winged golden ball. 

Ginny and Demelza scored a goal apiece, giving the 
red-and-gold-clad supporters below something to 

Page | 466 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




cheer about. Then Cadwallader scored again, making 
things level, but Luna did not seem to have noticed; 
she appeared singularly uninterested in such 
mundane things as the score, and kept attempting to 
draw the crowd’s attention to such things as 
interestingly shaped clouds and the possibility that 
Zacharias Smith, who had so far failed to maintain 
possession of the Quaffle for longer than a minute, 
was suffering from something called “Loser’s Lurgy.” 

“Seventy-forty to Hufflepuff!” barked Professor 
McGonagall into Luna’s megaphone. 

“Is it, already?” said Luna vaguely. “Oh, look! The 
Gryffindor Keeper’s got hold of one of the Beater’s 
bats.” 

Harry spun around in midair. Sure enough, 

McLaggen, for reasons best known to himself, had 
pulled Peakes ’s bat from him and appeared to be 
demonstrating how to hit a Bludger toward an 
oncoming Cadwallader. 

“ Will you give him back his bat and get back to the goal 
posts!” roared Harry, pelting toward McLaggen just as 
McLaggen took a ferocious swipe at the Bludger and 
mishit it. 

A blinding, sickening pain ... a flash of light . . . distant 
screams . . . and the sensation of falling down a long 
tunnel ... 

And the next thing Harry knew, he was lying in a 
remarkably warm and comfortable bed and looking 
up at a lamp that was throwing a circle of golden light 
onto a shadowy ceiling. He raised his head 
awkwardly. There on his left was a familiar-looking, 
freckly, red-haired person. 



Page | 467 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Nice of you to drop in,” said Ron, grinning. 

Harry blinked and looked around. Of course: He was 
in the hospital wing. The sky outside was indigo 
streaked with crimson. The match must have finished 
hours ago ... as had any hope of cornering Malfoy. 
Harry’s head felt strangely heavy; he raised a hand 
and felt a stiff turban of bandages. 

“What happened?” 

“Cracked skull,” said Madam Pomfrey, bustling up 
and pushing him back against his pillows. “Nothing to 
worry about, I mended it at once, but I’m keeping you 
in overnight. You shouldn’t overexert yourself for a 
few hours.” 

“I don’t want to stay here overnight,” said Harry 
angrily, sitting up and throwing back his covers. “I 
want to find McLaggen and kill him.” 

“I’m afraid that would come under the heading of 
‘overexertion,’ ” said Madam Pomfrey, pushing him 
firmly back onto the bed and raising her wand in a 
threatening manner. “You will stay here until I 
discharge you, Potter, or I shall call the headmaster.” 

She bustled back into her office, and Harry sank back 
into his pillows, fuming. 

“D’you know how much we lost by?” he asked Ron 
through clenched teeth. 

“Well, yeah I do,” said Ron apologetically. “Final score 
was three hundred and twenty to sixty.” 

“Brilliant,” said Harry savagely. “Really brilliant! 

When I get hold of McLaggen — ” 



Page | 468 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You don’t want to get hold of him, he’s the size of a 
troll,” said Ron reasonably. “Personally, I think there’s 
a lot to be said for hexing him with that toenail thing 
of the Prince’s. Anyway, the rest of the team might’ve 
dealt with him before you get out of here, they’re not 
happy. ...” 

There was a note of badly suppressed glee in Ron’s 
voice; Harry could tell he was nothing short of thrilled 
that McLaggen had messed up so badly. Harry lay 
there, staring up at the patch of light on the ceiling, 
his recently mended skull not hurting, precisely, but 
feeling slightly tender underneath all the bandaging. 

“I could hear the match commentary from here,” said 
Ron, his voice now shaking with laughter. “I hope 
Luna always commentates from now on. ... Loser’s 
Lurgy ...” 

But Harry was still too angry to see much humor in 
the situation, and after a while Ron’s snorts subsided. 

“Ginny came in to visit while you were unconscious,” 
he said, after a long pause, and Harry’s imagination 
zoomed into overdrive, rapidly constructing a scene in 
which Ginny, weeping over his lifeless form, confessed 
her feelings of deep attraction to him while Ron gave 
them his blessing. ... “She reckons you only just 
arrived on time for the match. How come? You left 
here early enough.” 

“Oh ...” said Harry, as the scene in his mind’s eye 
imploded. “Yeah ... well, I saw Malfoy sneaking off 
with a couple of girls who didn’t look like they wanted 
to be with him, and that’s the second time he’s made 
sure he isn’t down on the Quidditch pitch with the 
rest of the school; he skipped the last match too, 
remember?” Harry sighed. “Wish I’d followed him 
now, the match was such a fiasco. ...” 

Page | 469 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t be stupid,” said Ron sharply. “You couldn’t 
have missed a Quidditch match just to follow Malfoy, 
you’re the Captain!” 

“I want to know what he’s up to,” said Harry. “And 
don’t tell me it’s all in my head, not after what I 
overheard between him and Snape — ” 

“I never said it was all in your head,” said Ron, 
hoisting himself up on an elbow in turn and frowning 
at Harry, “but there’s no rule saying only one person 
at a time can be plotting anything in this place! You’re 
getting a bit obsessed with Malfoy, Harry. I mean, 
thinking about missing a match just to follow him ...” 

“I want to catch him at it!” said Harry in frustration. 

“I mean, where’s he going when he disappears off the 
map?” 

“I dunno . . . Hogsmeade?” suggested Ron, yawning. 

“I’ve never seen him going along any of the secret 
passageways on the map. I thought they were being 
watched now anyway?” 

“Well then, I dunno,” said Ron. 

Silence fell between them. Harry stared up at the 
circle of lamplight above him, thinking. . . . 

If only he had Rufus Scrimgeour’s power, he would 
have been able to set a tail upon Malfoy, but 
unfortunately Harry did not have an office full of 
Aurors at his command. ... He thought fleetingly of 
trying to set something up with the D.A., but there 
again was the problem that people would be missed 
from lessons; most of them, after all, still had full 
schedules. ... 



Page | 470 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




There was a low, rumbling snore from Ron’s bed. 

After a while Madam Pomfrey came out of her office, 
this time wearing a thick dressing gown. It was 
easiest to feign sleep; Harry rolled over onto his side 
and listened to all the curtains closing themselves as 
she waved her wand. The lamps dimmed, and she 
returned to her office; he heard the door click behind 
her and knew that she was off to bed. 

This was, Harry reflected in the darkness, the third 
time that he had been brought to the hospital wing 
because of a Quidditch injury. Last time he had fallen 
off his broom due to the presence of dementors 
around the pitch, and the time before that, all the 
bones had been removed from his arm by the 
incurably inept Professor Lockhart. ... That had been 
his most painful injury by far ... he remembered the 
agony of regrowing an armful of bones in one night, a 
discomfort not eased by the arrival of an unexpected 
visitor in the middle of the — 

Harry sat bolt upright, his heart pounding, his 
bandage turban askew. He had the solution at last: 
There was a way to have Malfoy followed — how could 
he have forgotten, why hadn’t he thought of it before? 

But the question was, how to call him? What did you 
do? 

Quietly, tentatively, Harry spoke into the darkness. 
“Kreacher?” 

There was a very loud crack, and the sounds of 
scuffling and squeaks filled the silent room. Ron 
awoke with a yelp. 

“What’s going — ?” 



Page | 471 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry pointed his wand hastily at the door of Madam 
Pomfrey’s office and muttered, “MuffliatoV’ so that she 
would not come running. Then he scrambled to the 
end of his bed for a better look at what was going on. 

Two house-elves were rolling around on the floor in 
the middle of the dormitory, one wearing a shrunken 
maroon jumper and several woolly hats, the other, a 
filthy old rag strung over his hips like a loincloth. 
Then there was another loud bang, and Peeves the 
Poltergeist appeared in midair above the wrestling 
elves. 

“I was watching that, Potty!” he told Harry 
indignantly, pointing at the fight below, before letting 
out a loud cackle. “Look at the ickle creatures 
squabbling, bitey bitey, punchy punchy — ” 

“Kreacher will not insult Harry Potter in front of 
Dobby, no he won’t, or Dobby will shut Kreacher’s 
mouth for him!” cried Dobby in a high-pitched voice. 

“ — kicky, scratchy!” cried Peeves happily, now pelting 
bits of chalk at the elves to enrage them further. 
“Tweaky, pokey!” 

“Kreacher will say what he likes about his master, oh 
yes, and what a master he is, filthy friend of 
Mudbloods, oh, what would poor Kreacher’s mistress 
say — ?” 

Exactly what Kreacher’s mistress would have said 
they did not find out, for at that moment Dobby sank 
his knobbly little fist into Kreacher’s mouth and 
knocked out half of his teeth. Harry and Ron both 
leapt out of their beds and wrenched the two elves 
apart, though they continued to try and kick and 
punch each other, egged on by Peeves, who swooped 



Page | 472 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




around the lamp squealing, “Stick your fingers up his 
nosey, draw his cork and pull his earsies — ” 

Harry aimed his wand at Peeves and said, “Langlockl” 
Peeves clutched at his throat, gulped, then swooped 
from the room making obscene gestures but unable to 
speak, owing to the fact that his tongue had just 
glued itself to the roof of his mouth. 

“Nice one,” said Ron appreciatively, lifting Dobby into 
the air so that his flailing limbs no longer made 
contact with Kreacher. “That was another Prince hex, 
wasn’t it?” 

“Yeah,” said Harry, twisting Kreacher’s wizened arm 
into a half nelson. “Right — I’m forbidding you to fight 
each other! Well, Kreacher, you’re forbidden to fight 
Dobby. Dobby, I know I’m not allowed to give you 
orders — ” 

“Dobby is a free house-elf and he can obey anyone he 
likes and Dobby will do whatever Harry Potter wants 
him to do!” said Dobby, tears now streaming down his 
shriveled little face onto his jumper. 

“Okay then,” said Harry, and he and Ron both 
released the elves, who fell to the floor but did not 
continue fighting. 

“Master called me?” croaked Kreacher, sinking into a 
bow even as he gave Harry a look that plainly wished 
him a painful death. 

“Yeah, I did,” said Harry, glancing toward Madam 
Pomfrey’s office door to check that the Muffliato spell 
was still working; there was no sign that she had 
heard any of the commotion. “I’ve got a job for you.” 



Page | 473 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Kreacher will do whatever Master wants,” said 
Kreacher, sinking so low that his lips almost touched 
his gnarled toes, “because Kreacher has no choice, 
but Kreacher is ashamed to have such a master, yes 



“Dobby will do it, Harry Potter!” squeaked Dobby, his 
tennis-ball-sized eyes still swimming in tears. “Dobby 
would be honored to help Harry Potter!” 

“Come to think of it, it would be good to have both of 
you,” said Harry. “Okay then ... I want you to tail 
Draco Malfoy.” 

Ignoring the look of mingled surprise and 
exasperation on Ron’s face, Harry went on, “I want to 
know where he’s going, who he’s meeting, and what 
he’s doing. I want you to follow him around the 
clock.” 

“Yes, Harry Potter!” said Dobby at once, his great eyes 
shining with excitement. “And if Dobby does it wrong, 
Dobby will throw himself off the topmost tower, Harry 
Potter!” 

“There won’t be any need for that,” said Harry hastily. 

“Master wants me to follow the youngest of the 
Malfoys?” croaked Kreacher. “Master wants me to spy 
upon the pure-blood great-nephew of my old 
mistress?” 

“That’s the one,” said Harry, foreseeing a great danger 
and determining to prevent it immediately. “And 
you’re forbidden to tip him off, Kreacher, or to show 
him what you’re up to, or to talk to him at all, or to 
write him messages or ... or to contact him in any 
way. Got it?” 



Page | 474 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




He thought he could see Kreacher struggling to see a 
loophole in the instructions he had just been given 
and waited. After a moment or two, and to Harry’s 
great satisfaction, Kreacher bowed deeply again and 
said, with bitter resentment, “Master thinks of 
everything, and Kreacher must obey him even though 
Kreacher would much rather be the servant of the 
Malfoy boy, oh yes. ...” 

“That’s settled, then,” said Harry. “I’ll want regular 
reports, but make sure I’m not surrounded by people 
when you turn up. Ron and Hermione are okay. And 
don’t tell anyone what you’re doing. Just stick to 
Malfoy like a couple of wart plasters.” 



Page | 475 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






LORD VOLDEMORT’S REQUEST 

Harry and Ron left the hospital wing first thing on 
Monday morning, restored to full health by the 
ministrations of Madam Pomfrey and now able to 
enjoy the benefits of having been knocked out and 
poisoned, the best of which was that Hermione was 
friends with Ron again. Hermione even escorted them 
down to breakfast, bringing with her the news that 
Ginny had argued with Dean. The drowsing creature 
in Harry’s chest suddenly raised its head, sniffing the 
air hopefully. 

“What did they row about?” he asked, trying to sound 
casual as they turned onto a seventh-floor corridor 
that was deserted but for a very small girl who had 
been examining a tapestry of trolls in tutus. She 
looked terrified at the sight of the approaching sixth 
years and dropped the heavy brass scales she was 
carrying. 

“It’s all right!” said Hermione kindly, hurrying forward 
to help her. “Here ...” 



Page | 476 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



She tapped the broken scales with her wand and 
said, “Reparo.” The girl did not say thank you, but 
remained rooted to the spot as they passed and 
watched them out of sight; Ron glanced back at her. 

“I swear they’re getting smaller,” he said. 

“Never mind her,” said Harry, a little impatiently. 
“What did Ginny and Dean row about, Hermione?” 

“Oh, Dean was laughing about McLaggen hitting that 
Bludger at you,” said Hermione. 

“It must’ve looked funny,” said Ron reasonably. 

“It didn’t look funny at all!” said Hermione hotly. “It 
looked terrible and if Coote and Peakes hadn’t caught 
Harry he could have been very badly hurt!” 

“Yeah, well, there was no need for Ginny and Dean to 
split up over it,” said Harry, still trying to sound 
casual. “Or are they still together?” 

“Yes, they are — but why are you so interested?” 
asked Hermione, giving Harry a sharp look. 

“I just don’t want my Quidditch team messed up 
again!” he said hastily, but Hermione continued to 
look suspicious, and he was most relieved when a 
voice behind them called, “Harry!” giving him an 
excuse to turn his back on her. 

“Oh, hi, Luna.” 

“I went to the hospital wing to find you,” said Luna, 
rummaging in her bag. “But they said you’d left. ...” 

She thrust what appeared to be a green onion, a large 
spotted toadstool, and a considerable amount of what 

Page | 477 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




looked like cat litter into Ron’s hands, finally pulling 
out a rather grubby scroll of parchment that she 
handed to Harry. 

"... I’ve been told to give you this.” 

It was a small roll of parchment, which Harry 
recognized at once as another invitation to a lesson 
with Dumbledore. 

“Tonight,” he told Ron and Hermione, once he had 
unrolled it. 

“Nice commentary last match!” said Ron to Luna as 
she took back the green onion, the toadstool, and the 
cat litter. Luna smiled vaguely. 

“You’re making fun of me, aren’t you?” she said. 
“Everyone says I was dreadful.” 

“No, I’m serious!” said Ron earnestly. “I can’t 
remember enjoying commentary more! What is this, 
by the way?” he added, holding the onionlike object 
up to eye level. 

“Oh, it’s a Gurdyroot,” she said, stuffing the cat litter 
and the toadstool back into her bag. “You can keep it 
if you like, I’ve got a few of them. They’re really 
excellent for warding off Gulping Plimpies.” 

And she walked away, leaving Ron chortling, still 
clutching the Gurdyroot. 

“You know, she’s grown on me, Luna,” he said, as 
they set off again for the Great Hall. “I know she’s 
insane, but it’s in a good — ” 



Page | 478 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




He stopped talking very suddenly. Lavender Brown 
was standing at the foot of the marble staircase 
looking thunderous. 

“Hi,” said Ron nervously. 

“C’mon,” Harry muttered to Hermione, and they sped 
past, though not before they had heard Lavender say, 
“Why didn’t you tell me you were getting out today? 
And why was she with you?” 

Ron looked both sulky and annoyed when he 
appeared at breakfast half an hour later, and though 
he sat with Lavender, Harry did not see them 
exchange a word all the time they were together. 
Hermione was acting as though she was quite 
oblivious to all of this, but once or twice Harry saw an 
inexplicable smirk cross her face. All that day she 
seemed to be in a particularly good mood, and that 
evening in the common room she even consented to 
look over (in other words, finish writing) Harry’s 
Herbology essay, something she had been resolutely 
refusing to do up to this point, because she had 
known that Harry would then let Ron copy his work. 

“Thanks a lot, Hermione,” said Harry, giving her a 
hasty pat on the back as he checked his watch and 
saw that it was nearly eight o’clock. “Listen, I’ve got to 
hurry or I’ll be late for Dumbledore. ...” 

She did not answer, but merely crossed out a few of 
his feebler sentences in a weary sort of way. Grinning, 
Harry hurried out through the portrait hole and off to 
the headmaster’s office. The gargoyle leapt aside at 
the mention of toffee eclairs, and Harry took the spiral 
staircase two steps at a time, knocking on the door 
just as a clock within chimed eight. 



Page | 479 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Enter,” called Dumbledore, but as Harry put out a 
hand to push the door, it was wrenched open from 
inside. There stood Professor Trelawney. 

“Aha!” she cried, pointing dramatically at Harry as 
she blinked at him through her magnifying 
spectacles. “So this is the reason I am to be thrown 
unceremoniously from your office, Dumbledore!” 

“My dear Sybill,” said Dumbledore in a slightly 
exasperated voice, “there is no question of throwing 
you unceremoniously from anywhere, but Harry does 
have an appointment, and I really don’t think there is 
any more to be said — ” 

“Very well,” said Professor Trelawney, in a deeply 
wounded voice. “If you will not banish the usurping 
nag, so be it. ... Perhaps I shall find a school where 
my talents are better appreciated. ...” 

She pushed past Harry and disappeared down the 
spiral staircase; they heard her stumble halfway 
down, and Harry guessed that she had tripped over 
one of her trailing shawls. 

“Please close the door and sit down, Harry,” said 
Dumbledore, sounding rather tired. 

Harry obeyed, noticing as he took his usual seat in 
front of Dumbledore ’s desk that the Pensieve lay 
between them once more, as did two more tiny crystal 
bottles full of swirling memory. 

“Professor Trelawney still isn’t happy Firenze is 
teaching, then?” Harry asked. 

“No,” said Dumbledore, “Divination is turning out to 
be much more trouble than I could have foreseen, 
never having studied the subject myself. I cannot ask 

Page | 480 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Firenze to return to the forest, where he is now an 
outcast, nor can I ask Sybill Trelawney to leave. 
Between ourselves, she has no idea of the danger she 
would be in outside the castle. She does not know — 
and I think it would be unwise to enlighten her — 
that she made the prophecy about you and 
Voldemort, you see.” 

Dumbledore heaved a deep sigh, then said, “But 
never mind my staffing problems. We have much 
more important matters to discuss. Firstly — have 
you managed the task I set you at the end of our 
previous lesson?” 

“Ah,” said Harry, brought up short. What with 
Apparition lessons and Quidditch and Ron being 
poisoned and getting his skull cracked and his 
determination to find out what Draco Malfoy was up 
to, Harry had almost forgotten about the memory 
Dumbledore had asked him to extract from Professor 
Slughorn. “Well, I asked Professor Slughorn about it 
at the end of Potions, sir, but, er, he wouldn’t give it 
to me.” 

There was a little silence. 

“I see,” said Dumbledore eventually, peering at Harry 
over the top of his half-moon spectacles and giving 
Harry the usual sensation that he was being X-rayed. 
“And you feel that you have exerted your very best 
efforts in this matter, do you? That you have 
exercised all of your considerable ingenuity? That you 
have left no depth of cunning unplumbed in your 
quest to retrieve the memory?” 

“Well,” Harry stalled, at a loss for what to say next. 

His single attempt to get hold of the memory suddenly 
seemed embarrassingly feeble. “Well ... the day Ron 
swallowed love potion by mistake I took him to 

Page | 481 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Professor Slughorn. I thought maybe if I got Professor 
Slughorn in a good enough mood — ” 

“And did that work?” asked Dumbledore. 

“Well, no, sir, because Ron got poisoned — ” 

“ — which, naturally, made you forget all about trying 
to retrieve the memory; I would have expected nothing 
else, while your best friend was in danger. Once it 
became clear that Mr. Weasley was going to make a 
full recovery, however, I would have hoped that you 
returned to the task I set you. I thought I made it 
clear to you how very important that memory is. 
Indeed, I did my best to impress upon you that it is 
the most crucial memory of all and that we will be 
wasting our time without it.” 

A hot, prickly feeling of shame spread from the top of 
Harry’s head all the way down his body. Dumbledore 
had not raised his voice, he did not even sound angry, 
but Harry would have preferred him to yell; this cold 
disappointment was worse than anything. 

“Sir,” he said, a little desperately, “it isn’t that I wasn’t 
bothered or anything, I’ve just had other — other 
things ...” 

“Other things on your mind,” Dumbledore finished 
the sentence for him. “I see.” 

Silence fell between them again, the most 
uncomfortable silence Harry had ever experienced 
with Dumbledore; it seemed to go on and on, 
punctuated only by the little grunting snores of the 
portrait of Armando Dippet over Dumbledore ’s head. 
Harry felt strangely diminished, as though he had 
shrunk a little since he had entered the room. When 
he could stand it no longer he said, “Professor 
Page | 482 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore, I’m really sorry. I should have done 
more. ... I should have realized you wouldn’t have 
asked me to do it if it wasn’t really important.” 

“Thank you for saying that, Harry,” said Dumbledore 
quietly. “May I hope, then, that you will give this 
matter higher priority from now on? There will be 
little point in our meeting after tonight unless we 
have that memory.” 

“I’ll do it, sir, I’ll get it from him,” he said earnestly. 

“Then we shall say no more about it just now,” said 
Dumbledore more kindly, “but continue with our 
story where we left off. You remember where that 
was?” 

“Yes, sir,” said Harry quickly. “Voldemort killed his 
father and his grandparents and made it look as 
though his Uncle Morfin did it. Then he went back to 
Hogwarts and he asked ... he asked Professor 
Slughorn about Horcruxes,” he mumbled 
shamefacedly. 

“Very good,” said Dumbledore. “Now, you will 
remember, I hope, that I told you at the very outset of 
these meetings of ours that we would be entering the 
realms of guesswork and speculation?” 

“Yes, sir.” 

“Thus far, as I hope you agree, I have shown you 
reasonably firm sources of fact for my deductions as 
to what Voldemort did until the age of seventeen?” 

Harry nodded. 

“But now, Harry,” said Dumbledore, “now things 
become murkier and stranger. If it was difficult to find 

Page | 483 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




evidence about the boy Riddle, it has been almost 
impossible to find anyone prepared to reminisce 
about the man Voldemort. In fact, I doubt whether 
there is a soul alive, apart from himself, who could 
give us a full account of his life since he left 
Hogwarts. However, I have two last memories that I 
would like to share with you.” Dumbledore indicated 
the two little crystal bottles gleaming beside the 
Pensieve. “I shall then be glad of your opinion as to 
whether the conclusions I have drawn from them 
seem likely.” 

The idea that Dumbledore valued his opinion this 
highly made Harry feel even more deeply ashamed 
that he had failed in the task of retrieving the Horcrux 
memory, and he shifted guiltily in his seat as 
Dumbledore raised the first of the two bottles to the 
light and examined it. 

“I hope you are not tired of diving into other people’s 
memories, for they are curious recollections, these 
two,” he said. “This first one came from a very old 
house-elf by the name of Hokey. Before we see what 
Hokey witnessed, I must quickly recount how Lord 
Voldemort left Hogwarts. 

“He reached the seventh year of his schooling with, as 
you might have expected, top grades in every 
examination he had taken. All around him, his 
classmates were deciding which jobs they were to 
pursue once they had left Hogwarts. Nearly everybody 
expected spectacular things from Tom Riddle, prefect, 
Head Boy, winner of the Award for Special Services to 
the School. I know that several teachers, Professor 
Slughorn amongst them, suggested that he join the 
Ministry of Magic, offered to set up appointments, put 
him in touch with useful contacts. He refused all 
offers. The next thing the staff knew, Voldemort was 
working at Borgin and Burkes.” 

Page | 484 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“At Borgin and Burkes?” Harry repeated, stunned. 



“At Borgin and Burkes,” repeated Dumbledore calmly. 
“I think you will see what attractions the place held 
for him when we have entered Hokey’s memory. But 
this was not Voldemort’s first choice of job. Hardly 
anyone knew of it at the time — I was one of the few 
in whom the then headmaster confided — but 
Voldemort first approached Professor Dippet and 
asked whether he could remain at Hogwarts as a 
teacher.” 

“He wanted to stay here? Why?” asked Harry, more 
amazed still. 

“I believe he had several reasons, though he confided 
none of them to Professor Dippet,” said Dumbledore. 
“Firstly, and very importantly, Voldemort was, I 
believe, more attached to this school than he has ever 
been to a person. Hogwarts was where he had been 
happiest; the first and only place he had felt at 
home.” 

Harry felt slightly uncomfortable at these words, for 
this was exactly how he felt about Hogwarts too. 

“Secondly, the castle is a stronghold of ancient magic. 
Undoubtedly Voldemort had penetrated many more of 
its secrets than most of the students who pass 
through the place, but he may have felt that there 
were still mysteries to unravel, stores of magic to tap. 

“And thirdly, as a teacher, he would have had great 
power and influence over young witches and wizards. 
Perhaps he had gained the idea from Professor 
Slughorn, the teacher with whom he was on best 
terms, who had demonstrated how influential a role a 
teacher can play. I do not imagine for an instant that 
Voldemort envisaged spending the rest of his life at 
Page | 485 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Hogwarts, but I do think that he saw it as a useful 
recruiting ground, and a place where he might begin 
to build himself an army.” 

“But he didn’t get the job, sir?” 

“No, he did not. Professor Dippet told him that he was 
too young at eighteen, but invited him to reapply in a 
few years, if he still wished to teach.” 

“How did you feel about that, sir?” asked Harry 
hesitantly. 

“Deeply uneasy,” said Dumbledore. “I had advised 
Armando against the appointment — I did not give 
the reasons I have given you, for Professor Dippet was 
very fond of Voldemort and convinced of his honesty. 
But I did not want Lord Voldemort back at this 
school, and especially not in a position of power.” 

“Which job did he want, sir? What subject did he 
want to teach?” 

Somehow, Harry knew the answer even before 
Dumbledore gave it. 

“Defense Against the Dark Arts. It was being taught at 
the time by an old Professor by the name of Galatea 
Merrythought, who had been at Hogwarts for nearly 
fifty years. 

“So Voldemort went off to Borgin and Burkes, and all 
the staff who had admired him said what a waste it 
was, a brilliant young wizard like that, working in a 
shop. However, Voldemort was no mere assistant. 
Polite and handsome and clever, he was soon given 
particular jobs of the type that only exist in a place 
like Borgin and Burkes, which specializes, as you 
know, Harry, in objects with unusual and powerful 
Page |486 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




properties. Voldemort was sent to persuade people to 
part with their treasures for sale by the partners, and 
he was, by all accounts, unusually gifted at doing 
this.” 

“I’ll bet he was,” said Harry, unable to contain 
himself. 

“Well, quite,” said Dumbledore, with a faint smile. 
“And now it is time to hear from Hokey the house-elf, 
who worked for a very old, very rich witch by the 
name of Hepzibah Smith.” 

Dumbledore tapped a bottle with his wand, the cork 
flew out, and he tipped the swirling memory into the 
Pensieve, saying as he did so, “After you, Harry.” 

Harry got to his feet and bent once more over the 
rippling silver contents of the stone basin until his 
face touched them. He tumbled through dark 
nothingness and landed in a sitting room in front of 
an immensely fat old lady wearing an elaborate ginger 
wig and a brilliant pink set of robes that flowed all 
around her, giving her the look of a melting iced cake. 
She was looking into a small jeweled mirror and 
dabbing rouge onto her already scarlet cheeks with a 
large powder puff, while the tiniest and oldest house- 
elf Harry had ever seen laced her fleshy feet into tight 
satin slippers. 

“Hurry up, Hokey!” said Hepzibah imperiously. “He 
said he’d come at four, it’s only a couple of minutes to 
and he’s never been late yet!” 

She tucked away her powder puff as the house-elf 
straightened up. The top of the elf’s head barely 
reached the seat of Hepzibah ’s chair, and her papery 
skin hung off her frame just like the crisp linen sheet 
she wore draped like a toga. 

Page | 487 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“How do I look?” said Hepzibah, turning her head to 
admire the various angles of her face in the mirror. 

“Lovely, madam,” squeaked Hokey. 

Harry could only assume that it was down in Hokey’s 
contract that she must lie through her teeth when 
asked this question, because Hepzibah Smith looked 
a long way from lovely in his opinion. 

A tinkling doorbell rang and both mistress and elf 
jumped. 

“Quick, quick, he’s here, Hokey!” cried Hepzibah and 
the elf scurried out of the room, which was so 
crammed with objects that it was difficult to see how 
anybody could navigate their way across it without 
knocking over at least a dozen things: There were 
cabinets full of little lacquered boxes, cases full of 
gold-embossed books, shelves of orbs and celestial 
globes, and many flourishing potted plants in brass 
containers. In fact, the room looked like a cross 
between a magical antique shop and a conservatory. 

The house-elf returned within minutes, followed by a 
tall young man Harry had no difficulty whatsoever in 
recognizing as Voldemort. He was plainly dressed in a 
black suit; his hair was a little longer than it had 
been at school and his cheeks were hollowed, but all 
of this suited him; he looked more handsome than 
ever. He picked his way through the cramped room 
with an air that showed he had visited many times 
before and bowed low over Hepzibah ’s fat little hand, 
brushing it with his lips. 

“I brought you flowers,” he said quietly, producing a 
bunch of roses from nowhere. 



Page | 488 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You naughty boy, you shouldn’t have!” squealed old 
Hepzibah, though Harry noticed that she had an 
empty vase standing ready on the nearest little table. 
“You do spoil this old lady, Tom. ... Sit down, sit 
down. ... Where’s Hokey? Ah ...” 

The house-elf had come dashing back into the room 
carrying a tray of little cakes, which she set at her 
mistress’s elbow. 

“Help yourself, Tom,” said Hepzibah, “I know how you 
love my cakes. Now, how are you? You look pale. They 
overwork you at that shop, I’ve said it a hundred 
times. ...” 

Voldemort smiled mechanically and Hepzibah 
simpered. 

“Well, what’s your excuse for visiting this time?” she 
asked, batting her lashes. 

“Mr. Burke would like to make an improved offer for 
the goblin-made armor,” said Voldemort. “Five 
hundred Galleons, he feels it is a more than fair — ” 

“Now, now, not so fast, or I’ll think you’re only here 
for my trinkets!” pouted Hepzibah. 

“I am ordered here because of them,” said Voldemort 
quietly. “I am only a poor assistant, madam, who 
must do as he is told. Mr. Burke wishes me to inquire 



“Oh, Mr. Burke, phooey!” said Hepzibah, waving a 
little hand. “I’ve something to show you that I’ve never 
shown Mr. Burke! Can you keep a secret, Tom? Will 
you promise you won’t tell Mr. Burke I’ve got it? He’d 
never let me rest if he knew I’d shown it to you, and 
I’m not selling, not to Burke, not to anyone! But you, 
Page | 489 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Tom, you’ll appreciate it for its history, not how many 
Galleons you can get for it.” 

“I’d be glad to see anything Miss Hepzibah shows me,” 
said Voldemort quietly, and Hepzibah gave another 
girlish giggle. 

“I had Hokey bring it out for me. ... Hokey, where are 
you? I want to show Mr. Riddle our finest treasure. ... 
In fact, bring both, while you’re at it. ...” 

“Here, madam,” squeaked the house-elf, and Harry 
saw two leather boxes, one on top of the other, 
moving across the room as if of their own volition, 
though he knew the tiny elf was holding them over 
her head as she wended her way between tables, 
pouffes, and footstools. 

“Now,” said Hepzibah happily, taking the boxes from 
the elf, laying them in her lap, and preparing to open 
the topmost one, “I think you’ll like this, Tom. ... Oh, 
if my family knew I was showing you. ... They can’t 
wait to get their hands on this!” 

She opened the lid. Harry edged forward a little to get 
a better view and saw what looked like a small golden 
cup with two finely wrought handles. 

“I wonder whether you know what it is, Tom? Pick it 
up, have a good look!” whispered Hepzibah, and 
Voldemort stretched out a long-fingered hand and 
lifted the cup by one handle out of its snug silken 
wrappings. Harry thought he saw a red gleam in his 
dark eyes. His greedy expression was curiously 
mirrored on Hepzibah’s face, except that her tiny eyes 
were fixed upon Voldemort’s handsome features. 

“A badger,” murmured Voldemort, examining the 
engraving upon the cup. “Then this was ... ?” 

Page | 490 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Helga Hufflepuff’s, as you very well know, you clever 
boy!” said Hepzibah, leaning forward with a loud 
creaking of corsets and actually pinching his hollow 
cheek. “Didn’t I tell you I was distantly descended? 
This has been handed down in the family for years 
and years. Lovely, isn’t it? And all sorts of powers it’s 
supposed to possess too, but I haven’t tested them 
thoroughly, I just keep it nice and safe in here. ...” 

She hooked the cup back off Voldemort’s long 
forefinger and restored it gently to its box, too intent 
upon settling it carefully back into position to notice 
the shadow that crossed Voldemort’s face as the cup 
was taken away. 

“Now then,” said Hepzibah happily, “where’s Hokey? 
Oh yes, there you are — take that away now, Hokey.” 

The elf obediently took the boxed cup, and Hepzibah 
turned her attention to the much flatter box in her 
lap. 

“I think you’ll like this even more, Tom,” she 
whispered. “Lean in a little, dear boy, so you can see. 
...Of course, Burke knows I’ve got this one, I bought 
it from him, and I daresay he’d love to get it back 
when I’m gone. ...” 

She slid back the fine filigree clasp and flipped open 
the box. There upon the smooth crimson velvet lay a 
heavy golden locket. 

Voldemort reached out his hand, without invitation 
this time, and held it up to the light, staring at it. 

“Slytherin’s mark,” he said quietly, as the light played 
upon an ornate, serpentine S. 



Page | 491 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“That’s right!” said Hepzibah, delighted, apparently, at 
the sight of Voldemort gazing at her locket, transfixed. 
“I had to pay an arm and a leg for it, but I couldn’t let 
it pass, not a real treasure like that, had to have it for 
my collection. Burke bought it, apparently, from a 
ragged-looking woman who seemed to have stolen it, 
but had no idea of its true value — ” 

There was no mistaking it this time: Voldemort’s eyes 
flashed scarlet at the words, and Harry saw his 
knuckles whiten on the locket’s chain. 

“ — I daresay Burke paid her a pittance but there you 
are. ... Pretty, isn’t it? And again, all kinds of powers 
attributed to it, though I just keep it nice and safe. ...” 

She reached out to take the locket back. For a 
moment, Harry thought Voldemort was not going to 
let go of it, but then it had slid through his fingers 
and was back in its red velvet cushion. 

“So there you are, Tom, dear, and I hope you enjoyed 
that!” 

She looked him full in the face and for the first time, 
Harry saw her foolish smile falter. 

“Are you all right, dear?” 

“Oh yes,” said Voldemort quietly. “Yes, I’m very well. 



“I thought — but a trick of the light, I suppose — ” 
said Hepzibah, looking unnerved, and Harry guessed 
that she too had seen the momentary red gleam in 
Voldemort’s eyes. “Here, Hokey, take these away and 
lock them up again. ... The usual enchantments ...” 



Page | 492 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Time to leave, Harry,” said Dumbledore quietly, and 
as the little elf bobbed away bearing the boxes, 
Dumbledore grasped Harry once again above the 
elbow and together they rose up through oblivion and 
back to Dumbledore ’s office. 

“Hepzibah Smith died two days after that little scene,” 
said Dumbledore, resuming his seat and indicating 
that Harry should do the same. “Hokey the house-elf 
was convicted by the Ministry of poisoning her 
mistress’s evening cocoa by accident.” 

“No way!” said Harry angrily. 

“I see we are of one mind,” said Dumbledore. 
“Certainly, there are many similarities between this 
death and that of the Riddles. In both cases, 
somebody else took the blame, someone who had a 
clear memory of having caused the death — ” 

“Hokey confessed?” 

“She remembered putting something in her mistress’s 
cocoa that turned out not to be sugar, but a lethal 
and little-known poison,” said Dumbledore. “It was 
concluded that she had not meant to do it, but being 
old and confused — ” 

“Voldemort modified her memory, just like he did with 
Morfin!” 

“Yes, that is my conclusion too,” said Dumbledore. 
“And, just as with Morfin, the Ministry was 
predisposed to suspect Hokey — ” 

“ — because she was a house-elf,” said Harry. He had 
rarely felt more in sympathy with the society 
Hermione had set up, S.P.E.W. 



Page | 493 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Precisely,” said Dumbledore. “She was old, she 
admitted to having tampered with the drink, and 
nobody at the Ministry bothered to inquire further. As 
in the case of Morfin, by the time I traced her and 
managed to extract this memory, her life was almost 
over — but her memory, of course, proves nothing 
except that Voldemort knew of the existence of the 
cup and the locket. 

“By the time Hokey was convicted, Hepzibah’s family 
had realized that two of her greatest treasures were 
missing. It took them a while to be sure of this, for 
she had many hiding places, having always guarded 
her collection most jealously. But before they were 
sure beyond doubt that the cup and the locket were 
both gone, the assistant who had worked at Borgin 
and Burkes, the young man who had visited 
Hepzibah so regularly and charmed her so well, had 
resigned his post and vanished. His superiors had no 
idea where he had gone; they were as surprised as 
anyone at his disappearance. And that was the last 
that was seen or heard of Tom Riddle for a very long 
time. 

“Now,” said Dumbledore, “if you don’t mind, Harry, I 
want to pause once more to draw your attention to 
certain points of our story. Voldemort had committed 
another murder; whether it was his first since he 
killed the Riddles, I do not know, but I think it was. 
This time, as you will have seen, he killed not for 
revenge, but for gain. He wanted the two fabulous 
trophies that poor, besotted, old woman showed him. 
Just as he had once robbed the other children at his 
orphanage, just as he had stolen his Uncle Morfin ’s 
ring, so he ran off now with Hepzibah’s cup and 
locket.” 

“But,” said Harry, frowning, “it seems mad. ... Risking 
everything, throwing away his job, just for those ...” 

Page | 494 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Mad to you, perhaps, but not to Voldemort,” said 
Dumbledore. “I hope you will understand in due 
course exactly what those objects meant to him, 
Harry, but you must admit that it is not difficult to 
imagine that he saw the locket, at least, as rightfully 
his.” 

“The locket maybe,” said Harry, “but why take the 
cup as well?” 

“It had belonged to another of Hogwarts’s founders,” 
said Dumbledore. “I think he still felt a great pull 
toward the school and that he could not resist an 
object so steeped in Hogwarts history. There were 
other reasons, I think. ... I hope to be able to 
demonstrate them to you in due course. 

“And now for the very last recollection I have to show 
you, at least until you manage to retrieve Professor 
Slughorn’s memory for us. Ten years separates 
Hokey’s memory and this one, ten years during which 
we can only guess at what Lord Voldemort was doing. 



Harry got to his feet once more as Dumbledore 
emptied the last memory into the Pensieve. 

“Whose memory is it?” he asked. 

“Mine,” said Dumbledore. 

And Harry dived after Dumbledore through the 
shifting silver mass, landing in the very office he had 
just left. There was Fawkes slumbering happily on his 
perch, and there behind the desk was Dumbledore, 
who looked very similar to the Dumbledore standing 
beside Harry, though both hands were whole and 
undamaged and his face was, perhaps, a little less 
lined. The one difference between the present-day 
Page | 495 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




office and this one was that it was snowing in the 
past; bluish flecks were drifting past the window in 
the dark and building up on the outside ledge. 

The younger Dumbledore seemed to be waiting for 
something, and sure enough, moments after their 
arrival, there was a knock on the door and he said, 
“Enter.” 

Harry let out a hastily stifled gasp. Voldemort had 
entered the room. His features were not those Harry 
had seen emerge from the great stone cauldron 
almost two years ago: They were not as snakelike, the 
eyes were not yet scarlet, the face not yet masklike, 
and yet he was no longer handsome Tom Riddle. It 
was as though his features had been burned and 
blurred; they were waxy and oddly distorted, and the 
whites of the eyes now had a permanently bloody 
look, though the pupils were not yet the slits that 
Harry knew they would become. He was wearing a 
long black cloak, and his face was as pale as the 
snow glistening on his shoulders. 

The Dumbledore behind the desk showed no sign of 
surprise. Evidently this visit had been made by 
appointment. 

“Good evening, Tom,” said Dumbledore easily. “Won’t 
you sit down?” 

“Thank you,” said Voldemort, and he took the seat to 
which Dumbledore had gestured — the very seat, by 
the looks of it, that Harry had just vacated in the 
present. “I heard that you had become headmaster,” 
he said, and his voice was slightly higher and colder 
than it had been. “A worthy choice.” 

“I am glad you approve,” said Dumbledore, smiling. 
“May I offer you a drink?” 

Page | 496 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“That would be welcome,” said Voldemort. “I have 
come a long way.” 

Dumbledore stood and swept over to the cabinet 
where he now kept the Pensieve, but which then was 
full of bottles. Having handed Voldemort a goblet of 
wine and poured one for himself, he returned to the 
seat behind his desk. 

“So, Tom ... to what do I owe the pleasure?” 

Voldemort did not answer at once, but merely sipped 
his wine. 

“They do not call me Tom’ anymore,” he said. “These 
days, I am known as — ” 

“I know what you are known as,” said Dumbledore, 
smiling pleasantly. “But to me, I’m afraid, you will 
always be Tom Riddle. It is one of the irritating things 
about old teachers. I am afraid that they never quite 
forget their charges’ youthful beginnings.” 

He raised his glass as though toasting Voldemort, 
whose face remained expressionless. Nevertheless, 
Harry felt the atmosphere in the room change subtly: 
Dumbledore’s refusal to use Voldemort’s chosen 
name was a refusal to allow Voldemort to dictate the 
terms of the meeting, and Harry could tell that 
Voldemort took it as such. 

“I am surprised you have remained here so long,” said 
Voldemort after a short pause. “I always wondered 
why a wizard such as yourself never wished to leave 
school.” 

“Well,” said Dumbledore, still smiling, “to a wizard 
such as myself, there can be nothing more important 
than passing on ancient skills, helping hone young 

Page | 497 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




minds. If I remember correctly, you once saw the 
attraction of teaching too.” 

“I see it still,” said Voldemort. “I merely wondered why 
you — who are so often asked for advice by the 
Ministry, and who have twice, I think, been offered 
the post of Minister — ” 

“Three times at the last count, actually,” said 
Dumbledore. “But the Ministry never attracted me as 
a career. Again, something we have in common, I 
think.” 

Voldemort inclined his head, unsmiling, and took 
another sip of wine. Dumbledore did not break the 
silence that stretched between them now, but waited, 
with a look of pleasant expectancy, for Voldemort to 
talk first. 

“I have returned,” he said, after a little while, “later, 
perhaps, than Professor Dippet expected ... but I have 
returned, nevertheless, to request again what he once 
told me I was too young to have. I have come to you to 
ask that you permit me to return to this castle, to 
teach. I think you must know that I have seen and 
done much since I left this place. I could show and 
tell your students things they can gain from no other 
wizard.” 

Dumbledore considered Voldemort over the top of his 
own goblet for a while before speaking. 

“Yes, I certainly do know that you have seen and done 
much since leaving us,” he said quietly. “Rumors of 
your doings have reached your old school, Tom. I 
should be sorry to believe half of them.” 



Page | 498 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Voldemort ’s expression remained impassive as he 
said, “Greatness inspires envy, envy engenders spite, 
spite spawns lies. You must know this, Dumbledore.” 

“You call it ‘greatness,’ what you have been doing, do 
you?” asked Dumbledore delicately. 

“Certainly,” said Voldemort, and his eyes seemed to 
burn red. “I have experimented; I have pushed the 
boundaries of magic further, perhaps, than they have 
ever been pushed — ” 

“Of some kinds of magic,” Dumbledore corrected him 
quietly. “Of some. Of others, you remain ... forgive me 
... woefully ignorant.” 

For the first time, Voldemort smiled. It was a taut 
leer, an evil thing, more threatening than a look of 
rage. 

“The old argument,” he said softly. “But nothing I 
have seen in the world has supported your famous 
pronouncements that love is more powerful than my 
kind of magic, Dumbledore.” 

“Perhaps you have been looking in the wrong places,” 
suggested Dumbledore. 

“Well, then, what better place to start my fresh 
researches than here, at Hogwarts?” said Voldemort. 
“Will you let me return? Will you let me share my 
knowledge with your students? I place myself and my 
talents at your disposal. I am yours to command.” 

Dumbledore raised his eyebrows. “And what will 
become of those whom you command? What will 
happen to those who call themselves — or so rumor 
has it — the Death Eaters?” 



Page | 499 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry could tell that Voldemort had not expected 
Dumbledore to know this name; he saw Voldemort’s 
eyes flash red again and the slitlike nostrils flare. 

“My friends,” he said, after a moment’s pause, “will 
carry on without me, I am sure.” 

“I am glad to hear that you consider them friends,” 
said Dumbledore. “I was under the impression that 
they are more in the order of servants.” 

“You are mistaken,” said Voldemort. 

“Then if I were to go to the Hog’s Head tonight, I 
would not find a group of them — Nott, Rosier, 
Mulciber, Dolohov — awaiting your return? Devoted 
friends indeed, to travel this far with you on a snowy 
night, merely to wish you luck as you attempted to 
secure a teaching post.” 

There could be no doubt that Dumbledore ’s detailed 
knowledge of those with whom he was traveling was 
even less welcome to Voldemort; however, he rallied 
almost at once. 

“You are omniscient as ever, Dumbledore.” 

“Oh no, merely friendly with the local barmen,” said 
Dumbledore lightly. “Now, Tom ...” 

Dumbledore set down his empty glass and drew 
himself up in his seat, the tips of his fingers together 
in a very characteristic gesture. 

“Let us speak openly. Why have you come here 
tonight, surrounded by henchmen, to request a job 
we both know you do not want?” 



Page | 500 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Voldemort looked coldly surprised. “A job I do not 
want? On the contrary, Dumbledore, I want it very 
much.” 



“Oh, you want to come back to Hogwarts, but you do 
not want to teach any more than you wanted to when 
you were eighteen. What is it you’re after, Tom? Why 
not try an open request for once?” 

Voldemort sneered. “If you do not want to give me a 
job -” 



“Of course I don’t,” said Dumbledore. “And I don’t 
think for a moment you expected me to. Nevertheless, 
you came here, you asked, you must have had a 
purpose.” 

Voldemort stood up. He looked less like Tom Riddle 
than ever, his features thick with rage. “This is your 
final word?” 

“It is,” said Dumbledore, also standing. 

“Then we have nothing more to say to each other.” 

“No, nothing,” said Dumbledore, and a great sadness 
filled his face. “The time is long gone when I could 
frighten you with a burning wardrobe and force you 
to make repayment for your crimes. But I wish I 
could, Tom. ... I wish I could. ...” 

For a second, Harry was on the verge of shouting a 
pointless warning: He was sure that Voldemort’s hand 
had twitched toward his pocket and his wand; but 
then the moment had passed, Voldemort had turned 
away, the door was closing, and he was gone. 

Harry felt Dumbledore ’s hand close over his arm 
again and moments later, they were standing together 

Page | 501 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




on almost the same spot, but there was no snow 
building on the window ledge, and Dumbledore’s 
hand was blackened and dead-looking once more. 

“Why?” said Harry at once, looking up into 
Dumbledore’s face. “Why did he come back? Did you 
ever find out?” 

“I have ideas,” said Dumbledore, “but no more than 
that.” 

“What ideas, sir?” 

“I shall tell you, Harry, when you have retrieved that 
memory from Professor Slughorn,” said Dumbledore. 
“When you have that last piece of the jigsaw, 
everything will, I hope, be clear ... to both of us.” 

Harry was still burning with curiosity and even 
though Dumbledore had walked to the door and was 
holding it open for him, he did not move at once. 

“Was he after the Defense Against the Dark Arts job 
again, sir? He didn’t say. ...” 

“Oh, he definitely wanted the Defense Against the 
Dark Arts job,” said Dumbledore. “The aftermath of 
our little meeting proved that. You see, we have never 
been able to keep a Defense Against the Dark Arts 
teacher for longer than a year since I refused the post 
to Lord Voldemort.” 



Page | 502 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






THE UNKNOWABLE ROOM 

Harry wracked his brains over the next week as to 
how he was to persuade Slughorn to hand over the 
true memory, but nothing in the nature of a brain 
wave occurred and he was reduced to doing what he 
did increasingly these days when at a loss: poring 
over his Potions book, hoping that the Prince would 
have scribbled something useful in a margin, as he 
had done so many times before. 

“You won’t find anything in there,” said Hermione 
firmly, late on Sunday evening. 

“Don’t start, Hermione,” said Harry. “If it hadn’t been 
for the Prince, Ron wouldn’t be sitting here now.” 

“He would if you’d just listened to Snape in our first 
year,” said Hermione dismissively. 

Harry ignored her. He had just found an incantation 
(“ Sectumsempral”) scrawled in a margin above the 
intriguing words “For Enemies,” and was itching to 



Page | 503 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



try it out, but thought it best not to in front of 
Hermione. Instead, he surreptitiously folded down the 
corner of the page. 

They were sitting beside the fire in the common room; 
the only other people awake were fellow sixth years. 
There had been a certain amount of excitement earlier 
when they had come back from dinner to find a new 
sign on the notice board that announced the date for 
their Apparition Test. Those who would be seventeen 
on or before the first test date, the twenty-first of 
April, had the option of signing up for additional 
practice sessions, which would take place (heavily 
supervised) in Hogsmeade. 

Ron had panicked on reading this notice; he had still 
not managed to Apparate and feared he would not be 
ready for the test. Hermione, who had now achieved 
Apparition twice, was a little more confident, but 
Harry, who would not be seventeen for another four 
months, could not take the test whether ready or not. 

“At least you can Apparate, though!” said Ron tensely. 
“You’ll have no trouble come July!” 

“I’ve only done it once,” Harry reminded him; he had 
finally managed to disappear and rematerialize inside 
his hoop during their previous lesson. 

Having wasted a lot of time worrying aloud about 
Apparition, Ron was now struggling to finish a 
viciously difficult essay for Snape that Harry and 
Hermione had already completed. Harry fully 
expected to receive low marks on his, because he had 
disagreed with Snape on the best way to tackle 
dementors, but he did not care: Slughorn’s memory 
was the most important thing to him now. 



Page | 504 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




‘Tm telling you, the stupid Prince isn’t going to be 
able to help you with this, Harry!” said Hermione, 
more loudly. “There’s only one way to force someone 
to do what you want, and that’s the Imperius Curse, 
which is illegal — ” 

“Yeah, I know that, thanks,” said Harry, not looking 
up from the book. “That’s why I’m looking for 
something different. Dumbledore says Veritaserum 
won’t do it, but there might be something else, a 
potion or a spell. ...” 

“You’re going about it the wrong way,” said Hermione. 
“Only you can get the memory, Dumbledore says. 

That must mean you can persuade Slughorn where 
other people can’t. It’s not a question of slipping him 
a potion, anyone could do that — ” 

“How d’you spell ‘belligerent’?” said Ron, shaking his 
quill very hard while staring at his parchment. “It 
can’t be B — U — M — ” 

“No, it isn’t,” said Hermione, pulling Ron’s essay 
toward her. “And ‘augury’ doesn’t begin O — R — G 
either. What kind of quill are you using?” 

“It’s one of Fred and George’s Spell-Check ones ... but 
I think the charm must be wearing off. ...” 

“Yes, it must,” said Hermione, pointing at the title of 
his essay, “because we were asked how we’d deal with 
dementors, not ‘Dugbogs,’ and I don’t remember you 
changing your name to ‘Roonil Wazlib’ either.” 

“Ah no!” said Ron, staring horror-struck at the 
parchment. “Don’t say I’ll have to write the whole 
thing out again!” 



Page | 505 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s okay, we can fix it,” said Hermione, pulling the 
essay toward her and taking out her wand. 

“I love you, Hermione,” said Ron, sinking back in his 
chair, rubbing his eyes wearily. 

Hermione turned faintly pink, but merely said, “Don’t 
let Lavender hear you saying that.” 

“I won’t,” said Ron into his hands. “Or maybe I will ... 
then she’ll ditch me ...” 

“Why don’t you ditch her if you want to finish it?” 
asked Harry. 

“You haven’t ever chucked anyone, have you?” said 
Ron. “You and Cho just — ” 

“Sort of fell apart, yeah,” said Harry 

“Wish that would happen with me and Lavender,” 
said Ron gloomily, watching Hermione silently 
tapping each of his misspelled words with the end of 
her wand, so that they corrected themselves on the 
page. “But the more I hint I want to finish it, the 
tighter she holds on. It’s like going out with the giant 
squid.” 

“There,” said Hermione, some twenty minutes later, 
handing back Ron’s essay. 

“Thanks a million,” said Ron. “Can I borrow your quill 
for the conclusion?” 

Harry, who had found nothing useful in the Half- 
Blood Prince’s notes so far, looked around; the three 
of them were now the only ones left in the common 
room, Seamus having just gone up to bed cursing 
Snape and his essay. The only sounds were the 
Page | 506 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




crackling of the fire and Ron scratching out one last 
paragraph on dementors using Hermione’s quill. 

Harry had just closed the Half-Blood Prince’s book, 
yawning, when — 

Crack. 

Hermione let out a little shriek; Ron spilled ink all 
over his freshly completed essay, and Harry said, 
“Kreacher!” 

The house-elf bowed low and addressed his own 
gnarled toes. 

“Master said he wanted regular reports on what the 
Malfoy boy is doing, so Kreacher has come to give — ” 

Crack. 

Dobby appeared alongside Kreacher, his tea-cozy hat 
askew. 

“Dobby has been helping too, Harry Potter!” he 
squeaked, casting Kreacher a resentful look. “And 
Kreacher ought to tell Dobby when he is coming to 
see Harry Potter so they can make their reports 
together!” 

“What is this?” asked Hermione, still looking shocked 
by these sudden appearances. “What’s going on, 
Harry?” 

Harry hesitated before answering, because he had not 
told Hermione about setting Kreacher and Dobby to 
tail Malfoy; house-elves were always such a touchy 
subject with her. 

“Well ... they’ve been following Malfoy for me,” he 
said. 

Page | 507 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Night and day,” croaked Kreacher. 

“Dobby has not slept for a week, Harry Potter!” said 
Dobby proudly, swaying where he stood. 

Hermione looked indignant. 

“You haven’t slept, Dobby? But surely, Harry, you 
didn’t tell him not to — ” 

“No, of course I didn’t,” said Harry quickly. “Dobby, 
you can sleep, all right? But has either of you found 
out anything?” he hastened to ask, before Hermione 
could intervene again. 

“Master Malfoy moves with a nobility that befits his 
pure blood,” croaked Kreacher at once. “His features 
recall the fine bones of my mistress and his manners 
are those of — ” 

“Draco Malfoy is a bad boy!” squeaked Dobby angrily. 
“A bad boy who — who — ” 

He shuddered from the tassel of his tea cozy to the 
toes of his socks and then ran at the fire, as though 
about to dive into it; Harry, to whom this was not 
entirely unexpected, caught him around the middle 
and held him fast. For a few seconds Dobby 
struggled, then went limp. 

“Thank you, Harry Potter,” he panted. “Dobby still 
finds it difficult to speak ill of his old masters. ...” 

Harry released him; Dobby straightened his tea cozy 
and said defiantly to Kreacher, “But Kreacher should 
know that Draco Malfoy is not a good master to a 
house-elf!” 



Page | 508 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah, we don’t need to hear about you being in love 
with Malfoy,” Harry told Kreacher. “Let’s fast forward 
to where he’s actually been going.” 

Kreacher bowed again, looking furious, and then said, 
“Master Malfoy eats in the Great Hall, he sleeps in a 
dormitory in the dungeons, he attends his classes in 
a variety of — ” 

“Dobby, you tell me,” said Harry, cutting across 
Kreacher. “Has he been going anywhere he shouldn’t 
have?” 

“Harry Potter, sir,” squeaked Dobby, his great orblike 
eyes shining in the firelight, “the Malfoy boy is 
breaking no rules that Dobby can discover, but he is 
still keen to avoid detection. He has been making 
regular visits to the seventh floor with a variety of 
other students, who keep watch for him while he 
enters — ” 

“The Room of Requirement!” said Harry, smacking 
himself hard on the forehead with Advanced Potion- 
Making. Hermione and Ron stared at him. “That’s 
where he’s been sneaking off to! That’s where he’s 
doing ... whatever he’s doing! And I bet that’s why 
he’s been disappearing off the map — come to think 
of it, I’ve never seen the Room of Requirement on 
there!” 

“Maybe the Marauders never knew the room was 
there,” said Ron. 

“I think it’ll be part of the magic of the room,” said 
Hermione. “If you need it to be Unplottable, it will be.” 

“Dobby, have you managed to get in to have a look at 
what Malfoy’s doing?” said Harry eagerly. 



Page | 509 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No, Harry Potter, that is impossible,” said Dobby. 



“No, it’s not,” said Harry at once. “Malfoy got into our 
headquarters there last year, so I’ll be able to get in 
and spy on him, no problem.” 

“But I don’t think you will, Harry,” said Hermione 
slowly. “Malfoy already knew exactly how we were 
using the room, didn’t he, because that stupid 
Marietta had blabbed. He needed the room to become 
the headquarters of the D.A., so it did. But you don’t 
know what the room becomes when Malfoy goes in 
there, so you don’t know what to ask it to transform 
into.” 

“There’ll be a way around that,” said Harry 
dismissively. “You’ve done brilliantly, Dobby.” 

“Kreacher’s done well too,” said Hermione kindly; but 
far from looking grateful, Kreacher averted his huge, 
bloodshot eyes and croaked at the ceiling, “The 
Mudblood is speaking to Kreacher, Kreacher will 
pretend he cannot hear — ” 

“Get out of it,” Harry snapped at him, and Kreacher 
made one last deep bow and Disapparated. “You’d 
better go and get some sleep too, Dobby.” 

“Thank you, Harry Potter, sir!” squeaked Dobby 
happily, and he too vanished. 

“How good’s this?” said Harry enthusiastically, 
turning to Ron and Hermione the moment the room 
was elf-free again. “We know where Malfoy’s going! 
We’ve got him cornered now!” 

“Yeah, it’s great,” said Ron glumly, who was 
attempting to mop up the sodden mass of ink that 
had recently been an almost completed essay. 

Page | 510 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




Hermione pulled it toward her and began siphoning 
the ink off with her wand. 

“But what’s all this about him going up there with a 
Variety of students’?” said Hermione. “How many 
people are in on it? You wouldn’t think he’d trust lots 
of them to know what he’s doing. ...” 

“Yeah, that is weird,” said Harry, frowning. “I heard 
him telling Crabbe it wasn’t Crabbe’s business what 
he was doing ... so what’s he telling all these ... all 
these ...” 

Harry’s voice tailed away; he was staring at the fire. 

“God, I’ve been stupid,” he said quietly. “It’s obvious, 
isn’t it? There was a great vat of it down in the 
dungeon. ... He could’ve nicked some any time during 
that lesson. ...” 

“Nicked what?” said Ron. 

“Polyjuice Potion. He stole some of the Polyjuice 
Potion Slughorn showed us in our first Potions 
lesson. ... There aren’t a whole variety of students 
standing guard for Malfoy ... it’s just Crabbe and 
Goyle as usual. ... Yeah, it all fits!” said Harry, 
jumping up and starting to pace in front of the fire. 
“They’re stupid enough to do what they’re told even if 
he won’t tell them what he’s up to ... but he doesn’t 
want them to be seen lurking around outside the 
Room of Requirement, so he’s got them taking 
Polyjuice to make them look like other people. ... 
Those two girls I saw him with when he missed 
Quidditch — ha! Crabbe and Goyle!” 

“Do you mean to say,” said Hermione in a hushed 
voice, “that that little girl whose scales I repaired — ?” 



Page | 511 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah, of course!” said Harry loudly, staring at her. 
“Of course! Malfoy must’ve been inside the room at 
the time, so she — what am I talking about? — he 
dropped the scales to tell Malfoy not to come out, 
because there was someone there! And there was that 
girl who dropped the toadspawn too! We’ve been 
walking past him all the time and not realizing it!” 

“He’s got Crabbe and Goyle transforming into girls?” 
guffawed Ron. “Blimey ... No wonder they don’t look 
too happy these days. ... I’m surprised they don’t tell 
him to stuff it. ...” 

“Well, they wouldn’t, would they, if he’s shown them 
his Dark Mark?” said Harry. 

“Hmmm ... the Dark Mark we don’t know exists,” said 
Hermione skeptically, rolling up Ron’s dried essay 
before it could come to any more harm and handing it 
to him. 

“Well see,” said Harry confidently. 

“Yes, we will,” Hermione said, getting to her feet and 
stretching. “But, Harry, before you get all excited, I 
still don’t think you’ll be able to get into the Room of 
Requirement without knowing what’s there first. And 
I don’t think you should forget” — she heaved her bag 
onto her shoulder and gave him a very serious look — 
“that what you’re supposed to be concentrating on is 
getting that memory from Slughorn. Good night.” 

Harry watched her go, feeling slightly disgruntled. 
Once the door to the girls’ dormitories had closed 
behind her he rounded on Ron. 

“What d’you think?” 



Page | 512 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Wish I could Disapparate like a house-elf,” said Ron, 
staring at the spot where Dobby had vanished. “I’d 
have that Apparition Test in the bag.” 

Harry did not sleep well that night. He lay awake for 
what felt like hours, wondering how Malfoy was using 
the Room of Requirement and what he, Harry, would 
see when he went in there the following day, for 
whatever Hermione said, Harry was sure that if 
Malfoy had been able to see the headquarters of the 
D.A., he would be able to see Malfoy ’s ... what could it 
be? A meeting place? A hideout? A storeroom? A 
workshop? Harry’s mind worked feverishly and his 
dreams, when he finally fell asleep, were broken and 
disturbed by images of Malfoy, who turned into 
Slughorn, who turned into Snape. ... 

Harry was in a state of great anticipation over 
breakfast the following morning; he had a free period 
before Defense Against the Dark Arts and was 
determined to spend it trying to get into the Room of 
Requirement. Hermione was rather ostentatiously 
showing no interest in his whispered plans for forcing 
entry into the room, which irritated Harry, because he 
thought she might be a lot of help if she wanted to. 

“Look,” he said quietly, leaning forward and putting a 
hand on the Daily Prophet, which she had just 
removed from a post owl, to stop her from opening it 
and vanishing behind it. “I haven’t forgotten about 
Slughorn, but I haven’t got a clue how to get that 
memory off him, and until I get a brain wave why 
shouldn’t I find out what Malfoy’s doing?” 

“I’ve already told you, you need to persuade 
Slughorn,” said Hermione. “It’s not a question of 
tricking him or bewitching him, or Dumbledore could 
have done it in a second. Instead of messing around 
outside the Room of Requirement” — she jerked the 
Page | 513 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




Prophet out from under Harry’s hand and unfolded it 
to look at the front page — “you should go and find 
Slughorn and start appealing to his better nature.” 

“Anyone we know — ?” asked Ron, as Hermione 
scanned the headlines. 

“Yes!” said Hermione, causing both Harry and Ron to 
gag on their breakfast. “But it’s all right, he’s not 
dead — it’s Mundungus, he’s been arrested and sent 
to Azkaban! Something to do with impersonating an 
Inferius during an attempted burglary . . . and 
someone called Octavius Pepper has vanished. ... Oh, 
and how horrible, a nine-year-old boy has been 
arrested for trying to kill his grandparents, they think 
he was under the Imperius Curse. ...” 

They finished their breakfast in silence. Hermione set 
off immediately for Ancient Runes; Ron for the 
common room, where he still had to finish his 
conclusion on Snape’s dementor essay; and Harry for 
the corridor on the seventh floor and the stretch of 
wall opposite the tapestry of Barnabas the Barmy 
teaching trolls to do ballet. 

Harry slipped on his Invisibility Cloak once he had 
found an empty passage, but he need not have 
bothered. When he reached his destination he found 
it deserted. Harry was not sure whether his chances 
of getting inside the room were better with Malfoy 
inside it or out, but at least his first attempt was not 
going to be complicated by the presence of Crabbe or 
Goyle pretending to be an eleven-year-old girl. 

He closed his eyes as he approached the place where 
the Room of Requirement’s door was concealed. He 
knew what he had to do; he had become most 
accomplished at it last year. Concentrating with all 
his might he thought, I need to see what Malfoy ’s 
Page | 514 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




doing in here. ... I need to see what Malfoy’s doing in 
here. ... I need to see what Malfoy’s doing in here. ... 

Three times he walked past the door; then, his heart 
pounding with excitement, he opened his eyes and 
faced it — 

But he was still looking at a stretch of mundanely 
blank wall. 

He moved forward and gave it an experimental push. 
The stone remained solid and unyielding. 

“Okay,” said Harry aloud. “Okay ... I thought the 
wrong thing. ...” 

He pondered for a moment then set off again, eyes 
closed, concentrating as hard as he could. 

I need to see the place where Malfoy keeps coming 
secretly. ... I need to see the place where Malfoy keeps 
coming secretly. . . . 

After three walks past, he opened his eyes 
expectantly. 

There was no door. 

“Oh, come off it,” he told the wall irritably. “That was 
a clear instruction. ... Fine ...” 

He thought hard for several minutes before striding 
off once more. 

I need you to become the place you become for Draco 
Malfoy. ... 

He did not immediately open his eyes when he had 
finished his patrolling; he was listening hard, as 

Page | 515 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




though he might hear the door pop into existence. He 
heard nothing, however, except the distant twittering 
of birds outside. He opened his eyes. 

There was still no door. 

Harry swore. Someone screamed. He looked around to 
see a gaggle of first years running back around the 
corner, apparently under the impression that they 
had just encountered a particularly foulmouthed 
ghost. 

Harry tried every variation of “I need to see what 
Draco Malfoy is doing inside you” that he could think 
of for a whole hour, at the end of which he was forced 
to concede that Hermione might have had a point: 

The room simply did not want to open for him. 
Frustrated and annoyed, he set off for Defense 
Against the Dark Arts, pulling off his Invisibility Cloak 
and stuffing it into his bag as he went. 

“Late again, Potter,” said Snape coldly, as Harry 
hurried into the candlelit classroom. “Ten points from 
Gryffindor.” 

Harry scowled at Snape as he flung himself into the 
seat beside Ron; half the class was still on its feet, 
taking out books and organizing their things; he 
could not be much later than any of them. 

“Before we start, I want your dementor essays,” said 
Snape, waving his wand carelessly, so that twenty- 
five scrolls of parchment soared into the air and 
landed in a neat pile on his desk. “And I hope for your 
sakes they are better than the tripe I had to endure 
on resisting the Imperius Curse. Now, if you will all 
open your books to page — what is it, Mr. Finnigan?” 



Page | 516 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Sir,” said Seamus, “I’ve been wondering, how do you 
tell the difference between an Inferius and a ghost? 
Because there was something in the paper about an 
Inferius — ” 

“No, there wasn’t,” said Snape in a bored voice. 

“But sir, I heard people talking — ” 

“If you had actually read the article in question, Mr. 
Finnigan, you would have known that the so-called 
Inferius was nothing but a smelly sneak thief by the 
name of Mundungus Fletcher.” 

“I thought Snape and Mundungus were on the same 
side,” muttered Harry to Ron and Hermione. 
“Shouldn’t he be upset Mundungus has been arrest 



“But Potter seems to have a lot to say on the subject,” 
said Snape, pointing suddenly at the back of the 
room, his black eyes fixed on Harry “Let us ask Potter 
how we would tell the difference between an Inferius 
and a ghost.” 

The whole class looked around at Harry, who hastily 
tried to recall what Dumbledore had told him the 
night that they had gone to visit Slughorn. 

“Er — well — ghosts are transparent — ” he said. 

“Oh, very good,” interrupted Snape, his lip curling. 
“Yes, it is easy to see that nearly six years of magical 
education have not been wasted on you, Potter. 
‘Ghosts are transparent.’ ” 

Pansy Parkinson let out a high-pitched giggle. Several 
other people were smirking. Harry took a deep breath 
and continued calmly, though his insides were 

Page | 517 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




boiling, “Yeah, ghosts are transparent, but Inferi are 
dead bodies, aren’t they? So they’d be solid — ” 

“A five-year-old could have told us as much,” sneered 
Snape. “The Inferius is a corpse that has been 
reanimated by a Dark wizard’s spells. It is not alive, it 
is merely used like a puppet to do the wizard’s 
bidding. A ghost, as I trust that you are all aware by 
now, is the imprint of a departed soul left upon the 
earth ... and of course, as Potter so wisely tells us, 
transparent.” 

“Well, what Harry said is the most useful if we’re 
trying to tell them apart!” said Ron. “When we come 
face-to-face with one down a dark alley, we’re going to 
be having a shufti to see if it’s solid, aren’t we, we’re 
not going to be asking, ‘Excuse me, are you the 
imprint of a departed soul?’ ” 

There was a ripple of laughter, instantly quelled by 
the look Snape gave the class. 

“Another ten points from Gryffindor,” said Snape. “I 
would expect nothing more sophisticated from you, 
Ronald Weasley, the boy so solid he cannot Apparate 
half an inch across a room.” 

“IVo!” whispered Hermione, grabbing Harry’s arm as 
he opened his mouth furiously. “There’s no point, 
you’ll just end up in detention again, leave it!” 

“Now open your books to page two hundred and 
thirteen,” said Snape, smirking a little, “and read the 
first two paragraphs on the Cruciatus Curse. ...” 

Ron was very subdued all through the class. When 
the bell sounded at the end of the lesson, Lavender 
caught up with Ron and Harry (Hermione 
mysteriously melted out of sight as she approached) 

Page | 518 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




and abused Snape hotly for his jibe about Ron’s 
Apparition, but this seemed to merely irritate Ron, 
and he shook her off by making a detour into the 
boys’ bathroom with Harry. 

“Snape’s right, though, isn’t he?” said Ron, after 
staring into a cracked mirror for a minute or two. “I 
dunno whether it’s worth me taking the test. I just 
can’t get the hang of Apparition.” 

“You might as well do the extra practice sessions in 
Hogsmeade and see where they get you,” said Harry 
reasonably. “It’ll be more interesting than trying to get 
into a stupid hoop anyway. Then, if you’re still not — 
you know — as good as you’d like to be, you can 
postpone the test, do it with me over the summ — 
Myrtle, this is the boys’ bathroom!” 

The ghost of a girl had risen out of the toilet in a 
cubicle behind them and was now floating in midair, 
staring at them through thick, white, round glasses. 

“Oh,” she said glumly. “It’s you two.” 

“Who were you expecting?” said Ron, looking at her in 
the mirror. 

“Nobody,” said Myrtle, picking moodily at a spot on 
her chin. “He said he’d come back and see me, but 
then you said you’d pop in and visit me too” — she 
gave Harry a reproachful look — “and I haven’t seen 
you for months and months. I’ve learned not to expect 
too much from boys.” 

“I thought you lived in that girls’ bathroom?” said 
Harry, who had been careful to give the place a wide 
berth for some years now. 



Page | 519 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I do,” she said, with a sulky little shrug, “but that 
doesn’t mean I can’t visit other places. I came and 
saw you in your bath once, remember?” 

“Vividly,” said Harry. 

“But I thought he liked me,” she said plaintively. 
“Maybe if you two left, he’d come back again. ... We 
had lots in common. ... I’m sure he felt it. ...” 

And she looked hopefully toward the door. 

“When you say you had lots in common,” said Ron, 
sounding rather amused now, “d’you mean he lives in 
an S-bend too?” 

“No,” said Myrtle defiantly, her voice echoing loudly 
around the old tiled bathroom. “I mean he’s sensitive, 
people bully him too, and he feels lonely and hasn’t 
got anybody to talk to, and he’s not afraid to show his 
feelings and cry!” 

“There’s been a boy in here crying?” said Harry 
curiously. “A young boy?” 

“Never you mind!” said Myrtle, her small, leaky eyes 
fixed on Ron, who was now definitely grinning. “I 
promised I wouldn’t tell anyone, and I’ll take his 
secret to the — ” 

“ — not the grave, surely?” said Ron with a snort. “The 
sewers, maybe ...” 

Myrtle gave a howl of rage and dived back into the 
toilet, causing water to slop over the sides and onto 
the floor. Goading Myrtle seemed to have put fresh 
heart into Ron. 



Page | 520 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You’re right,” he said, swinging his schoolbag back 
over his shoulder, “I’ll do the practice sessions in 
Hogsmeade before I decide about taking the test.” 

And so the following weekend, Ron joined Hermione 
and the rest of the sixth years who would turn 
seventeen in time to take the test in a fortnight. Harry 
felt rather jealous watching them all get ready to go 
into the village; he missed making trips there, and it 
was a particularly fine spring day, one of the first 
clear skies they had seen in a long time. However, he 
had decided to use the time to attempt another 
assault on the Room of Requirement. 

“You’d do better,” said Hermione, when he confided 
this plan to Ron and her in the entrance hall, “to go 
straight to Slughorn’s office and try and get that 
memory from him.” 

“I’ve been trying!” said Harry crossly, which was 
perfectly true. He had lagged behind after every 
Potions lesson that week in an attempt to corner 
Slughorn, but the Potions master always left the 
dungeon so fast that Harry had not been able to catch 
him. Twice, Harry had gone to his office and knocked, 
but received no reply, though on the second occasion 
he was sure he had heard the quickly stifled sounds 
of an old gramophone. 

“He doesn’t want to talk to me, Hermione! He can tell 
I’ve been trying to get him on his own again, and he’s 
not going to let it happen!” 

“Well, you’ve just got to keep at it, haven’t you?” 

The short queue of people waiting to file past Filch, 
who was doing his usual prodding act with the 
Secrecy Sensor, moved forward a few steps and Harry 
did not answer in case he was overheard by the 

Page | 521 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




caretaker. He wished Ron and Hermione both luck, 
then turned and climbed the marble staircase again, 
determined, whatever Hermione said, to devote an 
hour or two to the Room of Requirement. 

Once out of sight of the entrance hall, Harry pulled 
the Marauder’s Map and his Invisibility Cloak from 
his bag. Having concealed himself, he tapped the 
map, murmured, “ I solemnly swear that I am up to no 
good,” and scanned it carefully. 

As it was Sunday morning, nearly all the students 
were inside their various common rooms, the 
Gryffindors in one tower, the Ravenclaws in another, 
the Slytherins in the dungeons, and the Hufflepuffs in 
the basement near the kitchens. Here and there a 
stray person meandered around the library or up a 
corridor. . . . There were a few people out in the 
grounds ... and there, alone in the seventh-floor 
corridor, was Gregory Goyle. There was no sign of the 
Room of Requirement, but Harry was not worried 
about that; if Goyle was standing guard outside it, the 
room was open, whether the map was aware of it or 
not. He therefore sprinted up the stairs, slowing down 
only when he reached the corner into the corridor, 
when he began to creep, very slowly, toward the very 
same little girl, clutching her heavy brass scales, that 
Hermione had so kindly helped a fortnight before. He 
waited until he was right behind her before bending 
very low and whispering, “Hello ... you’re very pretty, 
aren’t you?” 

Goyle gave a high-pitched scream of terror, threw the 
scales up into the air, and sprinted away, vanishing 
from sight long before the sound of the scales 
smashing had stopped echoing around the corridor. 
Laughing, Harry turned to contemplate the blank wall 
behind which, he was sure, Draco Malfoy was now 
standing frozen, aware that someone unwelcome was 
Page | 522 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




out there, but not daring to make an appearance. It 
gave Harry a most agreeable feeling of power as he 
tried to remember what form of words he had not yet 
tried. 

Yet this hopeful mood did not last long. Half an hour 
later, having tried many more variations of his 
request to see what Malfoy was up to, the wall was 
just as doorless as ever. Harry felt frustrated beyond 
belief; Malfoy might be just feet away from him, and 
there was still not the tiniest shred of evidence as to 
what he was doing in there. Losing his patience 
completely, Harry ran at the wall and kicked it. 

“OUCH!” 

He thought he might have broken his toe; as he 
clutched it and hopped on one foot, the Invisibility 
Cloak slipped off him. 

“Harry?” 

He spun around, one-legged, and toppled over. There, 
to his utter astonishment, was Tonks, walking toward 
him as though she frequently strolled up this 
corridor. 

“What’re you doing here?” he said, scrambling to his 
feet again; why did she always have to find him lying 
on the floor? 

“I came to see Dumbledore,” said Tonks. 

Harry thought she looked terrible: thinner than 
usual, her mouse-colored hair lank. 

“His office isn’t here,” said Harry, “it’s round the other 
side of the castle, behind the gargoyle — ” 



Page | 523 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I know,” said Tonks. “He’s not there. Apparently he’s 
gone away again.” 

“Has he?” said Harry, putting his bruised foot gingerly 
back on the floor. “Hey — you don’t know where he 
goes, I suppose?” 

“No,” said Tonks. 

“What did you want to see him about?” 

“Nothing in particular,” said Tonks, picking, 
apparently unconsciously, at the sleeve of her robe. “I 
just thought he might know what’s going on. ... I’ve 
heard rumors ... people getting hurt ...” 

“Yeah, I know, it’s all been in the papers,” said Harry. 
“That little kid trying to kill his — ” 

“The Prophet’s often behind the times,” said Tonks, 
who didn’t seem to be listening to him. “You haven’t 
had any letters from anyone in the Order recently?” 

“No one from the Order writes to me anymore,” said 
Harry, “not since Sirius — ” 

He saw that her eyes had filled with tears. 

“I’m sorry,” he muttered awkwardly. “I mean ... I miss 
him, as well. ...” 

“What?” said Tonks blankly, as though she had not 
heard him. “Well ... I’ll see you around, Harry ...” 

And she turned abruptly and walked back down the 
corridor, leaving Harry to stare after her. After a 
minute or so, he pulled the Invisibility Cloak on again 
and resumed his efforts to get into the Room of 
Requirement, but his heart was not in it. Finally, a 
Page | 524 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




hollow feeling in his stomach and the knowledge that 
Ron and Hermione would soon be back for lunch 
made him abandon the attempt and leave the corridor 
to Malfoy who, hopefully, would be too afraid to leave 
for some hours to come. 

He found Ron and Hermione in the Great Hall, 
already halfway through an early lunch. 

“I did it — well, kind of!” Ron told Harry 
enthusiastically when he caught sight of him. “I was 
supposed to be Apparating to outside Madam 
Puddifoot’s Tea Shop and I overshot it a bit, ended up 
near Scrivenshaft’s, but at least I moved!” 

“Good one,” said Harry. “How’d you do, Hermione?” 

“Oh, she was perfect, obviously,” said Ron, before 
Hermione could answer. “Perfect deliberation, 
divination, and desperation or whatever the hell it is 
— we all went for a quick drink in the Three 
Broomsticks after and you should’ve heard Twycross 
going on about her — I’ll be surprised if he doesn’t 
pop the question soon — ” 

“And what about you?” asked Hermione, ignoring 
Ron. “Have you been up at the Room of Requirement 
all this time?” 

“Yep,” said Harry. “And guess who I ran into up 
there? Tonks!” 

“Tonks?” repeated Ron and Hermione together, 
looking surprised. 

“Yeah, she said she’d come to visit Dumbledore. ...” 

“If you ask me,” said Ron once Harry had finished 
describing his conversation with Tonks, “she’s 

Page | 525 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




cracking up a bit. Losing her nerve after what 
happened at the Ministry.” 

“It’s a bit odd,” said Hermione, who for some reason 
looked very concerned. “She’s supposed to be 
guarding the school, why’s she suddenly abandoning 
her post to come and see Dumbledore when he’s not 
even here?” 

“I had a thought,” said Harry tentatively. He felt 
strange about voicing it; this was much more 
Hermione’s territory than his. “You don’t think she 
can have been . . . you know ... in love with Sirius?” 

Hermione stared at him. 

“What on earth makes you say that?” 

“I dunno,” said Harry, shrugging, “but she was nearly 
crying when I mentioned his name . . . and her 
Patronus is a big four-legged thing now. ... I wondered 
whether it hadn’t become ... you know ... him.” 

“It’s a thought,” said Hermione slowly. “But I still 
don’t know why she’d be bursting into the castle to 
see Dumbledore, if that’s really why she was here. ...” 

“Goes back to what I said, doesn’t it?” said Ron, who 
was now shoveling mashed potato into his mouth. 
“She’s gone a bit funny. Lost her nerve. Women,” he 
said wisely to Harry, “they’re easily upset.” 

“And yet,” said Hermione, coming out of her reverie, “I 
doubt you’d find a woman who sulked for half an 
hour because Madam Rosmerta didn’t laugh at their 
joke about the hag, the Healer, and the Mimbulus 
mimbletonia.” 

Ron scowled. 

Page | 526 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






AFTER THE BURIAL 

Patches of bright blue sky were beginning to appear 
over the castle turrets, but these signs of approaching 
summer did not lift Harry’s mood. He had been 
thwarted, both in his attempts to find out what 
Malfoy was doing, and in his efforts to start a 
conversation with Slughorn that might lead, 
somehow, to Slughorn handing over the memory he 
had apparently suppressed for decades. 

“For the last time, just forget about Malfoy,” Hermione 
told Harry firmly. 

They were sitting with Ron in a sunny corner of the 
courtyard after lunch. Hermione and Ron were both 
clutching a Ministry of Magic leaflet — Common 
Apparition Mistakes and How to Avoid Them — for 
they were taking their tests that very afternoon, but 
by and large the leaflets had not proved soothing to 
the nerves. 



Page | 527 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



Ron gave a start and tried to hide behind Hermione as 
a girl came around the corner. 

“It isn’t Lavender,” said Hermione wearily. 

“Oh, good,” said Ron, relaxing. 

“Harry Potter?” said the girl. “I was asked to give you 
this.” 

“Thanks ...” 

Harry’s heart sank as he took the small scroll of 
parchment. Once the girl was out of earshot he said, 
“Dumbledore said we wouldn’t be having any more 
lessons until I got the memory!” 

“Maybe he wants to check on how you’re doing?” 
suggested Hermione, as Harry unrolled the 
parchment; but rather than finding Dumbledore ’s 
long, narrow, slanted writing he saw an untidy 
sprawl, very difficult to read due to the presence of 
large blotches on the parchment where the ink had 
run. 



Dear Harry, Ron, and Hermione, 

Aragog died last night Harry and Ron, you met him, 
and you know how special he was. Hermione, I know 
you’d have liked him. It would mean a lot to me if 
you’d nip down for the burial later this evening. I’m 
planning on doing it round dusk, that was his favorite 
time of day. I know you’re not supposed to be out that 
late, but you can use the cloak. Wouldn’t ask, but I 
can’t face it alone. 



Hagrid 

Page | 528 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Look at this,” said Harry, handing the note to 
Hermione. 

“Oh, for heaven’s sake,” she said, scanning it quickly 
and passing it to Ron, who read it through looking 
increasingly incredulous. 

“He’s mentaft” he said furiously. “That thing told its 
mates to eat Harry and me! Told them to help 
themselves! And now Hagrid expects us to go down 
there and cry over its horrible hairy body!” 

“It’s not just that,” said Hermione. “He’s asking us to 
leave the castle at night and he knows security’s a 
million times tighter and how much trouble we’d be in 
if we were caught.” 

“We’ve been down to see him by night before,” said 
Harry. 

“Yes, but for something like this?” said Hermione. 
“We’ve risked a lot to help Hagrid out, but after all — 
Aragog’s dead. If it were a question of saving him — ” 

“ — I’d want to go even less,” said Ron firmly. “You 
didn’t meet him, Hermione. Believe me, being dead 
will have improved him a lot.” 

Harry took the note back and stared down at all the 
inky blotches all over it. Tears had clearly fallen thick 
and fast upon the parchment. ... 

“Harry, you can’t be thinking of going,” said 
Hermione. “It’s such a pointless thing to get detention 
for.” 

Harry sighed. “Yeah, I know,” he said. “I s’pose 
Hagrid ’ll have to bury Aragog without us.” 



Page | 529 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes, he will,” said Hermione, looking relieved. “Look, 
Potions will be almost empty this afternoon, with us 
all off doing our tests. ... Try and soften Slughorn up 
a bit then!” 

“Fifty-seventh time lucky, you think?” said Harry 
bitterly. 

“Lucky,” said Ron suddenly. “Harry, that’s it — get 
lucky!” 

“What d’you mean?” 

“Use your lucky potion!” 

“Ron, that’s — that’s it!” said Hermione, sounding 
stunned. “Of course! Why didn’t I think of it?” 

Harry stared at them both. “Felix Felicis?” he said. “I 
dunno ... I was sort of saving it. ...” 

“What for?” demanded Ron incredulously. 

“What on earth is more important than this memory, 
Harry?” asked Hermione. 

Harry did not answer. The thought of that little golden 
bottle had hovered on the edges of his imagination for 
some time; vague and unformulated plans that 
involved Ginny splitting up with Dean, and Ron 
somehow being happy to see her with a new 
boyfriend, had been fermenting in the depths of his 
brain, unacknowledged except during dreams or the 
twilight time between sleeping and waking. . . . 

“Harry? Are you still with us?” asked Hermione. 

“Wha — ? Yeah, of course,” he said, pulling himself 
together. “Well ... okay. If I can’t get Slughorn to talk 

Page | 530 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




this afternoon, I’ll take some Felix and have another 
go this evening.” 

“That’s decided, then,” said Hermione briskly, getting 
to her feet and performing a graceful pirouette. 
“Destination ... determination ... deliberation ...” she 
murmured. 

“Oh, stop that,” Ron begged her, “I feel sick enough as 
it is — quick, hide me!” 

“It isn’t Lavender!” said Hermione impatiently, as 
another couple of girls appeared in the courtyard and 
Ron dived behind her. 

“Cool,” said Ron, peering over Hermione’s shoulder to 
check. “Blimey, they don’t look happy, do they?” 

“They’re the Montgomery sisters and of course they 
don’t look happy, didn’t you hear what happened to 
their little brother?” said Hermione. 

“I’m losing track of what’s happening to everyone’s 
relatives, to be honest,” said Ron. 

“Well, their brother was attacked by a werewolf. The 
rumor is that their mother refused to help the Death 
Eaters. Anyway, the boy was only five and he died in 
St. Mungo’s, they couldn’t save him.” 

“He died?” repeated Harry, shocked. “But surely 
werewolves don’t kill, they just turn you into one of 
them?” 

“They sometimes kill,” said Ron, who looked 
unusually grave now. “I’ve heard of it happening 
when the werewolf gets carried away.” 

“What was the werewolf’s name?” said Harry quickly. 

Page | 531 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




“Well, the rumor is that it was that Fenrir Greyback,” 
said Hermione. 

“I knew it — the maniac who likes attacking kids, the 
one Lupin told me about!” said Harry angrily. 

Hermione looked at him bleakly. 

“Harry, you’ve got to get that memory,” she said. “It’s 
all about stopping Voldemort, isn’t it? These dreadful 
things that are happening are all down to him. ...” 

The bell rang overhead in the castle and both 
Hermione and Ron jumped to their feet, looking 
terrified. 

“You’ll do fine,” Harry told them both, as they headed 
toward the entrance hall to meet the rest of the people 
taking their Apparition Test. “Good luck.” 

“And you too!” said Hermione with a significant look, 
as Harry headed off to the dungeons. 

There were only three of them in Potions that 
afternoon: Harry, Ernie, and Draco Malfoy. 

“All too young to Apparate just yet?” said Slughorn 
genially. “Not turned seventeen yet?” 

They shook their heads. 

“Ah well,” said Slughorn cheerily, “as we’re so few, 
we’ll do something fun. I want you all to brew me up 
something amusing!” 

“That sounds good, sir,” said Ernie sycophantically, 
rubbing his hands together. Malfoy, on the other 
hand, did not crack a smile. 



Page | 532 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“What do you mean, ‘something amusing?” he said 
irritably. 

“Oh, surprise me,” said Slughorn airily. 

Malfoy opened his copy of Advanced Potion-Making 
with a sulky expression. It could not have been 
plainer that he thought this lesson was a waste of 
time. Undoubtedly, Harry thought, watching him over 
the top of his own book, Malfoy was begrudging the 
time he could otherwise be spending in the Room of 
Requirement. 

Was it his imagination, or did Malfoy, like Tonks, look 
thinner? Certainly he looked paler; his skin still had 
that grayish tinge, probably because he so rarely saw 
daylight these days. But there was no air of 
smugness, excitement, or superiority; none of the 
swagger that he had had on the Hogwarts Express, 
when he had boasted openly of the mission he had 
been given by Voldemort. ... There could be only one 
conclusion, in Harry’s opinion: The mission, whatever 
it was, was going badly. 

Cheered by this thought, Harry skimmed through his 
copy of Advanced Potion-Making and found a heavily 
corrected Half-Blood Prince’s version of “An Elixir to 
Induce Euphoria,” which seemed not only to meet 
Slughorn ’s instructions, but which might (Harry’s 
heart leapt as the thought struck him) put Slughorn 
into such a good mood that he would be prepared to 
hand over that memory if Harry could persuade him 
to taste some. ... 

“Well, now, this looks absolutely wonderful,” said 
Slughorn an hour and a half later, clapping his hands 
together as he stared down into the sunshine yellow 
contents of Harry’s cauldron. “Euphoria, I take it? And 
what’s that I smell? Mmmm ... you’ve added just a 
Page | 533 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




sprig of peppermint, haven’t you? Unorthodox, but 
what a stroke of inspiration, Harry, of course, that 
would tend to counterbalance the occasional side 
effects of excessive singing and nose-tweaking. ... I 
really don’t know where you get these brain waves, 
my boy . . . unless — ” 

Harry pushed the Half-Blood Prince’s book deeper 
into his bag with his foot. 

“ — it’s just your mother’s genes coming out in you!” 

“Oh ... yeah, maybe,” said Harry, relieved. 

Ernie was looking rather grumpy; determined to 
outshine Harry for once, he had most rashly invented 
his own potion, which had curdled and formed a kind 
of purple dumpling at the bottom of his cauldron. 
Malfoy was already packing up, sour-faced; Slughorn 
had pronounced his Hiccuping Solution merely 
“passable.” 

The bell rang and both Ernie and Malfoy left at once. 

“Sir,” Harry began, but Slughorn immediately glanced 
over his shoulder; when he saw that the room was 
empty but for himself and Harry, he hurried away as 
fast as he could. 

“Professor — Professor, don’t you want to taste my po 
— ?” called Harry desperately. 

But Slughorn had gone. Disappointed, Harry emptied 
the cauldron, packed up his things, left the dungeon, 
and walked slowly back upstairs to the common 
room. 

Ron and Hermione returned in the late afternoon. 



Page | 534 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Harry!” cried Hermione as she climbed through the 
portrait hole. “Harry, I passed!” 

“Well done!” he said. “And Ron?” 

“He — he just failed,” whispered Hermione, as Ron 
came slouching into the room looking most morose. 
“It was really unlucky, a tiny thing, the examiner just 
spotted that he’d left half an eyebrow behind. ... How 
did it go with Slughorn?” 

“No joy,” said Harry, as Ron joined them. “Bad luck, 
mate, but you’ll pass next time — we can take it 
together.” 

“Yeah, I s’pose,” said Ron grumpily. “But half an 
eyebrow\ Like that matters!” 

“I know,” said Hermione soothingly, “it does seem 
really harsh. ...” 

They spent most of their dinner roundly abusing the 
Apparition examiner, and Ron looked fractionally 
more cheerful by the time they set off back to the 
common room, now discussing the continuing 
problem of Slughorn and the memory. 

“So, Harry — you going to use the Felix Felicis or 
what?” Ron demanded. 

“Yeah, I s’pose I’d better,” said Harry. “I don’t reckon 
I’ll need all of it, not twelve hours’ worth, it can’t take 
all night. ... I’ll just take a mouthful. Two or three 
hours should do it.” 

“It’s a great feeling when you take it,” said Ron 
reminiscently. “Like you can’t do anything wrong.” 



Page | 535 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“What are you talking about?” said Hermione, 
laughing. “You’ve never taken any!” 

“Yeah, but I thought I had, didn’t I?” said Ron, as 
though explaining the obvious. “Same difference 
really ...” 

As they had only just seen Slughorn enter the Great 
Hall and knew that he liked to take time over meals, 
they lingered for a while in the common room, the 
plan being that Harry should go to Slughorn ’s office 
once the teacher had had time to get back there. 
When the sun had sunk to the level of the treetops in 
the Forbidden Forest, they decided the moment had 
come, and after checking carefully that Neville, Dean, 
and Seamus were all in the common room, sneaked 
up to the boys’ dormitory. 

Harry took out the rolled-up socks at the bottom of 
his trunk and extracted the tiny, gleaming bottle. 

“Well, here goes,” said Harry, and he raised the little 
bottle and took a carefully measured gulp. 

“What does it feel like?” whispered Hermione. 

Harry did not answer for a moment. Then, slowly but 
surely, an exhilarating sense of infinite opportunity 
stole through him; he felt as though he could have 
done anything, anything at all ... and getting the 
memory from Slughorn seemed suddenly not only 
possible, but positively easy. ... 

He got to his feet, smiling, brimming with confidence. 

“Excellent,” he said. “Really excellent. Right ... I’m 
going down to Hagrid’s.” 



Page | 536 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“What?” said Ron and Hermione together, looking 
aghast. 

“No, Harry — you’ve got to go and see Slughorn, 
remember?” said Hermione. 

“No,” said Harry confidently. “I’m going to Hagrid’s, 

I’ve got a good feeling about going to Hagrid’s.” 

“You’ve got a good feeling about burying a giant 
spider?” asked Ron, looking stunned. 

“Yeah,” said Harry, pulling his Invisibility Cloak out of 
his bag. “I feel like it’s the place to be tonight, you 
know what I mean?” 

“No,” said Ron and Hermione together, both looking 
positively alarmed now. 

“This is Felix Felicis, I suppose?” said Hermione 
anxiously, holding up the bottle to the light. “You 
haven’t got another little bottle full of — I don’t know 



“Essence of Insanity?” suggested Ron, as Harry 
swung his cloak over his shoulders. 

Harry laughed, and Ron and Hermione looked even 
more alarmed. 

“Trust me,” he said. “I know what I’m doing ... or at 
least” — he strolled confidently to the door — “Felix 
does.” 

He pulled the Invisibility Cloak over his head and set 
off down the stairs, Ron and Hermione hurrying along 
behind him. At the foot of the stairs, Harry slid 
through the open door. 



Page | 537 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“What were you doing up there with her?” shrieked 
Lavender Brown, staring right through Harry at Ron 
and Hermione emerging together from the boys’ 
dormitories. Harry heard Ron spluttering behind him 
as he darted across the room away from them. 

Getting through the portrait hole was simple; as he 
approached it, Ginny and Dean came through it, and 
Harry was able to slip between them. As he did so, he 
brushed accidentally against Ginny. 

“Don’t push me, please, Dean,” she said, sounding 
annoyed. “You’re always doing that, I can get through 
perfectly well on my own. ...” 

The portrait swung closed behind Harry, but not 
before he had heard Dean make an angry retort. ... 

His feeling of elation increasing, Harry strode off 
through the castle. He did not have to creep along, for 
he met nobody on his way, but this did not surprise 
him in the slightest: This evening, he was the luckiest 
person at Hogwarts. 

Why he knew that going to Hagrid’s was the right 
thing to do, he had no idea. It was as though the 
potion was illuminating a few steps of the path at a 
time: He could not see the final destination, he could 
not see where Slughorn came in, but he knew that he 
was going the right way to get that memory. When he 
reached the entrance hall he saw that Filch had 
forgotten to lock the front door. Beaming, Harry threw 
it open and breathed in the smell of clean air and 
grass for a moment before walking down the steps 
into the dusk. 

It was when he reached the bottom step that it 
occurred to him how very pleasant it would be to pass 
the vegetable patch on his walk to Hagrid’s. It was not 
strictly on the way, but it seemed clear to Harry that 

Page | 538 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




this was a whim on which he should act, so he 
directed his feet immediately toward the vegetable 
patch, where he was pleased, but not altogether 
surprised, to find Professor Slughorn in conversation 
with Professor Sprout. Harry lurked behind a low 
stone wall, feeling at peace with the world and 
listening to their conversation. 

“I do thank you for taking the time, Pomona,” 
Slughorn was saying courteously, “most authorities 
agree that they are at their most efficacious if picked 
at twilight.” 

“Oh, I quite agree,” said Professor Sprout warmly. 
“That enough for you?” 

“Plenty, plenty,” said Slughorn, who, Harry saw, was 
carrying an armful of leafy plants. “This should allow 
for a few leaves for each of my third years, and some 
to spare if anybody over-stews them. ... Well, good 
evening to you, and many thanks again!” 

Professor Sprout headed off into the gathering 
darkness in the direction of her greenhouses, and 
Slughorn directed his steps to the spot where Harry 
stood, invisible. 

Seized with an immediate desire to reveal himself, 
Harry pulled off the cloak with a flourish. 

“Good evening, Professor.” 

“Merlin’s beard, Harry, you made me jump,” said 
Slughorn, stopping dead in his tracks and looking 
wary. “How did you get out of the castle?” 

“I think Filch must’ve forgotten to lock the doors,” 
said Harry cheerfully, and was delighted to see 
Slughorn scowl. 

Page | 539 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I’ll be reporting that man, he’s more concerned about 
litter than proper security if you ask me. ... But why 
are you out here, Harry?” 

“Well, sir, it’s Hagrid,” said Harry, who knew that the 
right thing to do just now was to tell the truth. “He’s 
pretty upset. ... But you won’t tell anyone, Professor? 

I don’t want trouble for him. ...” 

Slughorn’s curiosity was evidently aroused. “Well, I 
can’t promise that,” he said gruffly. “But I know that 
Dumbledore trusts Hagrid to the hilt, so I’m sure he 
can’t be up to anything very dreadful. ...” 

“Well, it’s this giant spider, he’s had it for years. ... It 
lived in the forest. ... It could talk and everything — ” 

“I heard rumors there were acromantulas in the 
forest,” said Slughorn softly, looking over at the mass 
of black trees. “It’s true, then?” 

“Yes,” said Harry. “But this one, Aragog, the first one 
Hagrid ever got, it died last night. He’s devastated. He 
wants company while he buries it and I said I’d go.” 

“Touching, touching,” said Slughorn absentmindedly, 
his large droopy eyes fixed upon the distant lights of 
Hagrid ’s cabin. “But acromantula venom is very 
valuable ... If the beast only just died it might not yet 
have dried out. ... Of course, I wouldn’t want to do 
anything insensitive if Hagrid is upset . . . but if there 
was any way to procure some ... I mean, it’s almost 
impossible to get venom from an acromantula while 
it’s alive. ...” 

Slughorn seemed to be talking more to himself than 
Harry now. 



Page | 540 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




"... seems an awful waste not to collect it ... might get 
a hundred Galleons a pint. ... To be frank, my salary 
is not large. ...” 

And now Harry saw clearly what was to be done. 

“Well,” he said, with a most convincing hesitancy, 
“well, if you wanted to come, Professor, Hagrid would 
probably be really pleased. ... Give Aragog a better 
send-off, you know ...” 

“Yes, of course,” said Slughorn, his eyes now 
gleaming with enthusiasm. “I tell you what, Harry, I’ll 
meet you down there with a bottle or two. ... We’ll 
drink the poor beast’s — well — not health — but 
we’ll send it off in style, anyway, once it’s buried. And 
I’ll change my tie, this one is a little exuberant for the 
occasion. ...” 

He bustled back into the castle, and Harry sped off to 
Hagrid ’s, delighted with himself. 

“Yeh came,” croaked Hagrid, when he opened the door 
and saw Harry emerging from the Invisibility Cloak in 
front of him. 

“Yeah — Ron and Hermione couldn’t, though,” said 
Harry. “They’re really sorry.” 

“Don’ — don’ matter ... He’d’ve bin touched yeh’re 
here, though, Harry. ...” 

Hagrid gave a great sob. He had made himself a black 
armband out of what looked like a rag dipped in boot 
polish, and his eyes were puffy, red, and swollen. 
Harry patted him consolingly on the elbow, which was 
the highest point of Hagrid he could easily reach. 

“Where are we burying him?” he asked. “The forest?” 

Page | 541 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Blimey, no,” said Hagrid, wiping his streaming eyes 
on the bottom of his shirt. “The other spiders won’ let 
me anywhere near their webs now Aragog’s gone. 
Turns out it was on’y on his orders they didn’ eat me! 
Can yeh believe that, Harry?” 

The honest answer was “yes”; Harry recalled with 
painful ease the scene when he and Ron had come 
face-to-face with the acromantulas: They had been 
quite clear that Aragog was the only thing that 
stopped them from eating Hagrid. 

“Never bin an area o’ the forest I couldn’ go before!” 
said Hagrid, shaking his head. “It wasn’ easy, gettin’ 
Aragog’s body out o’ there, I can tell yeh — they 
usually eat their dead, see. ... But I wanted ter give 
’im a nice burial ... a proper send-off ...” 

He broke into sobs again and Harry resumed the 
patting of his elbow, saying as he did so (for the 
potion seemed to indicate that it was the right thing 
to do), “Professor Slughorn met me coming down 
here, Hagrid.” 

“Not in trouble, are yeh?” said Hagrid, looking up, 
alarmed. “Yeh shouldn’ be outta the castle in the 
evenin’, I know it, it’s my fault — ” 

“No, no, when he heard what I was doing he said he’d 
like to come and pay his last respects to Aragog too,” 
said Harry. “He’s gone to change into something more 
suitable, I think ... and he said he’d bring some 
bottles so we can drink to Aragog’s memory. . . . 

“Did he?” said Hagrid, looking both astonished and 
touched. “Tha’s — tha’s righ’ nice of him, that is, an’ 
not turnin’ yeh in either. I’ve never really had a lot ter 
do with Horace Slughorn before. ... Cornin’ ter see old 



Page | 542 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Aragog off, though, eh? Well ... he ’d’ve liked that, 
Aragog would. ...” 

Harry thought privately that what Aragog would have 
liked most about Slughorn was the ample amount of 
edible flesh he provided, but he merely moved to the 
rear window of Hagrid ’s hut, where he saw the rather 
horrible sight of the enormous dead spider lying on its 
back outside, its legs curled and tangled. 

“Are we going to bury him here, Hagrid, in your 
garden?” 

“Jus’ beyond the pumpkin patch, I thought,” said 
Hagrid in a choked voice. “I’ve already dug the — yeh 
know — grave. Jus’ thought we’d say a few nice 
things over him — happy memories, yeh know — ” 

His voice quivered and broke. There was a knock on 
the door, and he turned to answer it, blowing his nose 
on his great spotted handkerchief as he did so. 
Slughorn hurried over the threshold, several bottles 
in his arms, and wearing a somber black cravat. 

“Hagrid,” he said, in a deep, grave voice. “So very 
sorry to hear of your loss.” 

“Tha’s very nice of yeh,” said Hagrid. “Thanks a lot. 

An’ thanks fer not givin’ Harry detention neither. ...” 

“Wouldn’t have dreamed of it,” said Slughorn. “Sad 
night, sad night ... Where is the poor creature?” 

“Out here,” said Hagrid in a shaking voice. “Shall we 
— shall we do it, then?” 

The three of them stepped out into the back garden. 
The moon was glistening palely through the trees 
now, and its rays mingled with the light spilling from 

Page | 543 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid’s window to illuminate Aragog’s body lying on 
the edge of a massive pit beside a ten-foot-high 
mound of freshly dug earth. 

“Magnificent,” said Slughorn, approaching the 
spider’s head, where eight milky eyes stared blankly 
at the sky and two huge, curved pincers shone, 
motionless, in the moonlight. Harry thought he heard 
the tinkle of bottles as Slughorn bent over the 
pincers, apparently examining the enormous hairy 
head. 

“It’s not ev’ryone appreciates how beau’iful they are,” 
said Hagrid to Slughorn ’s back, tears leaking from the 
corners of his crinkled eyes. “I didn’ know yeh were 
int’rested in creatures like Aragog, Horace.” 

“Interested? My dear Hagrid, I revere them,” said 
Slughorn, stepping back from the body. Harry saw 
the glint of a bottle disappear beneath his cloak, 
though Hagrid, mopping his eyes once more, noticed 
nothing. “Now ... shall we proceed to the burial?” 

Hagrid nodded and moved forward. He heaved the 
gigantic spider into his arms and, with an enormous 
grunt, rolled it into the dark pit. It hit the bottom with 
a rather horrible, crunchy thud. Hagrid started to cry 
again. 

“Of course, it’s difficult for you, who knew him best,” 
said Slughorn, who like Harry could reach no higher 
than Hagrid’s elbow, but patted it all the same. “Why 
don’t I say a few words?” 

He must have got a lot of good quality venom from 
Aragog, Harry thought, for Slughorn wore a satisfied 
smirk as he stepped up to the rim of the pit and said, 
in a slow, impressive voice, “Farewell, Aragog, king of 
arachnids, whose long and faithful friendship those 
Page | 544 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




who knew you won’t forget! Though your body will 
decay, your spirit lingers on in the quiet, web-spun 
places of your forest home. May your many-eyed 
descendants ever flourish and your human friends 
find solace for the loss they have sustained.” 

“Tha’ was ... tha’ was ... beau’iful!” howled Hagrid, 
and he collapsed onto the compost heap, crying 
harder than ever. 

“There, there,” said Slughorn, waving his wand so 
that the huge pile of earth rose up and then fell, with 
a muffled sort of crash, onto the dead spider, forming 
a smooth mound. “Let’s get inside and have a drink. 
Get on his other side, Harry. ... That’s it. ... Up you 
come, Hagrid ... Well done ...” 

They deposited Hagrid in a chair at the table. Fang, 
who had been skulking in his basket during the 
burial, now came padding softly across to them and 
put his heavy head into Harry’s lap as usual. 

Slughorn uncorked one of the bottles of wine he had 
brought. 

“I have had it all tested for poison,” he assured Harry, 
pouring most of the first bottle into one of Hagrid ’s 
bucket- sized mugs and handing it to Hagrid. “Had a 
house-elf taste every bottle after what happened to 
your poor friend Rupert.” 

Harry saw, in his mind’s eye, the expression on 
Hermione’s face if she ever heard about this abuse of 
house-elves, and decided never to mention it to her. 

“One for Harry ...” said Slughorn, dividing a second 
bottle between two mugs, "... and one for me. Well” — 
he raised his mug high — “to Aragog.” 

“Aragog,” said Harry and Hagrid together. 

Page | 545 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Both Slughorn and Hagrid drank deeply. Harry, 
however, with the way ahead illuminated for him by 
Felix Felicis, knew that he must not drink, so he 
merely pretended to take a gulp and then set the mug 
back on the table before him. 

“I had him from an egg, yeh know,” said Hagrid 
morosely. “Tiny little thing he was when he hatched. 
Bout the size of a Pekingese.” 

“Sweet,” said Slughorn. 

“Used ter keep him in a cupboard up at the school 
until ... well ...” 

Hagrid ’s face darkened and Harry knew why: Tom 
Riddle had contrived to have Hagrid thrown out of 
school, blamed for opening the Chamber of Secrets. 
Slughorn, however, did not seem to be listening; he 
was looking up at the ceiling, from which a number of 
brass pots hung, and also a long, silky skein of bright 
white hair. 

“That’s never unicorn hair, Hagrid?” 

“Oh, yeah,” said Hagrid indifferently. “Gets pulled out 
of their tails, they catch it on branches an’ stuff in the 
forest, yeh know ...” 

“But my dear chap, do you know how much that’s 
worth?” 

“I use it fer bindin’ on bandages an’ stuff if a creature 
gets injured,” said Hagrid, shrugging. “It’s dead useful 
... very strong, see.” 

Slughorn took another deep draught from his mug, 
his eyes moving carefully around the cabin now, 
looking, Harry knew, for more treasures that he might 

Page | 546 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




be able to convert into a plentiful supply of oak- 
matured mead, crystalized pineapple, and velvet 
smoking jackets. He refilled Hagrid’s mug and his 
own, and questioned him about the creatures that 
lived in the forest these days and how Hagrid was 
able to look after them all. Hagrid, becoming 
expansive under the influence of the drink and 
Slughorn ’s flattering interest, stopped mopping his 
eyes and entered happily into a long explanation of 
bowtruckle husbandry. 

The Felix Felicis gave Harry a little nudge at this 
point, and he noticed that the supply of drink that 
Slughorn had brought was running out fast. Harry 
had not yet managed to bring off the Refilling Charm 
without saying the incantation aloud, but the idea 
that he might not be able to do it tonight was 
laughable: Indeed, Harry grinned to himself as, 
unnoticed by either Hagrid or Slughorn (now 
swapping tales of the illegal trade in dragon eggs) he 
pointed his wand under the table at the emptying 
bottles and they immediately began to refill. 

After an hour or so, Hagrid and Slughorn began 
making extravagant toasts: to Hogwarts, to 
Dumbledore, to elf-made wine, and to — 

“Harry Potter!” bellowed Hagrid, slopping some of his 
fourteenth bucket of wine down his chin as he 
drained it. 

“Yes, indeed,” cried Slughorn a little thickly, “Parry 
Otter, the Chosen Boy Who — well — something of 
that sort,” he mumbled, and drained his mug too. 

Not long after this, Hagrid became tearful again and 
pressed the whole unicorn tail upon Slughorn, who 
pocketed it with cries of, “To friendship! To generosity! 
To ten Galleons a hair!” 

Page | 547 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




And for a while after that, Hagrid and Slughorn were 
sitting side by side, arms around each other, singing 
a slow sad song about a dying wizard called Odo. 

“Aaargh, the good die young,” muttered Hagrid, 
slumping low onto the table, a little cross-eyed, while 
Slughorn continued to warble the refrain. “Me dad 
was no age ter go ... nor were yer mum an’ dad, 
Harry...” 

Great fat tears oozed out of the corners of Hagrid ’s 
crinkled eyes again; he grasped Harry’s arm and 
shook it. 

“Bes’ wiz and witchard o’ their age I never knew ... 
terrible thing ... terrible thing ...” 

And Odo the hero, they bore him back home 
To the place that he’d known as a lad, 

sang Slughorn plaintively. 

They laid him to rest with his hat inside out 
And his wand snapped in two, which was sad. 

"... terrible,” Hagrid grunted, and his great shaggy 
head rolled sideways onto his arms and he fell asleep, 
snoring deeply. 

“Sorry,” said Slughorn with a hiccup. “Can’t carry a 
tune to save my life.” 

“Hagrid wasn’t talking about your singing,” said Harry 
quietly. “He was talking about my mum and dad 
dying.” 

“Oh,” said Slughorn, repressing a large belch. “Oh 
dear. Yes, that was — was terrible indeed. Terrible ... 
terrible ...” 

Page | 548 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




He looked quite at a loss for what to say, and resorted 
to refilling their mugs. 



“I don’t — don’t suppose you remember it, Harry?” he 
asked awkwardly. 

“No — well, I was only one when they died,” said 
Harry, his eyes on the flame of the candle flickering in 
Hagrid’s heavy snores. “But I’ve found out pretty 
much what happened since. My dad died first. Did 
you know that?” 

“I — I didn’t,” said Slughorn in a hushed voice. 

“Yeah . . . Voldemort murdered him and then stepped 
over his body toward my mum,” said Harry. 

Slughorn gave a great shudder, but he did not seem 
able to tear his horrified gaze away from Harry’s face. 

“He told her to get out of the way,” said Harry 
remorselessly. “He told me she needn’t have died. He 
only wanted me. She could have run.” 

“Oh dear,” breathed Slughorn. “She could have ... she 
needn’t ... That’s awful. ...” 

“It is, isn’t it?” said Harry, in a voice barely more than 
a whisper. “But she didn’t move. Dad was already 
dead, but she didn’t want me to go too. She tried to 
plead with Voldemort ... but he just laughed. ...” 

“That’s enough!” said Slughorn suddenly, raising a 
shaking hand. “Really, my dear boy, enough ... I’m an 
old man ... I don’t need to hear ... I don’t want to hear 



“I forgot,” lied Harry, Felix Felicis leading him on. 

“You liked her, didn’t you?” 

Page | 549 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Liked her?” said Slughorn, his eyes brimming with 
tears once more. “I don’t imagine anyone who met her 
wouldn’t have liked her. ... Very brave ... Very funny 
...It was the most horrible thing. ...” 

“But you won’t help her son,” said Harry. “She gave 
me her life, but you won’t give me a memory.” 

Hagrid’s rumbling snores filled the cabin. Harry 
looked steadily into Slughorn ’s tear-filled eyes. The 
Potions master seemed unable to look away. 

“Don’t say that,” he whispered. “It isn’t a question ... 

If it were to help you, of course ... but no purpose can 
be served ...” 

“It can,” said Harry clearly. “Dumbledore needs 
information. I need information.” 

He knew he was safe: Felix was telling him that 
Slughorn would remember nothing of this in the 
morning. Looking Slughorn straight in the eye, Harry 
leaned forward a little. 

“I am the Chosen One. I have to kill him. I need that 
memory.” 

Slughorn turned paler than ever; his shiny forehead 
gleamed with sweat. 

“You are the Chosen One?” 

“Of course I am,” said Harry calmly. 

“But then ... my dear boy ... you’re asking a great deal 
... you’re asking me, in fact, to aid you in your 
attempt to destroy — ” 



Page | 550 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You don’t want to get rid of the wizard who killed Lily 
Evans?” 

“Harry, Harry, of course I do, but — ” 

“You’re scared he’ll find out you helped me?” 

Slughorn said nothing; he looked terrified. 

“Be brave like my mother, Professor. ...” 

Slughorn raised a pudgy hand and pressed his 
shaking fingers to his mouth; he looked for a moment 
like an enormously overgrown baby. 

“I am not proud ...” he whispered through his fingers. 
“I am ashamed of what — of what that memory 
shows. ... I think I may have done great damage that 
day. ...” 

“You’d cancel out anything you did by giving me the 
memory,” said Harry. “It would be a very brave and 
noble thing to do.” 

Hagrid twitched in his sleep and snored on. Slughorn 
and Harry stared at each other over the guttering 
candle. There was a long, long silence, but Felix 
Felicis told Harry not to break it, to wait. 

Then, very slowly, Slughorn put his hand in his 
pocket and pulled out his wand. He put his other 
hand inside his cloak and took out a small, empty 
bottle. Still looking into Harry’s eyes, Slughorn 
touched the tip of his wand to his temple and 
withdrew it, so that a long, silver thread of memory 
came away too, clinging to the wand tip. Longer and 
longer the memory stretched until it broke and 
swung, silvery bright, from the wand. Slughorn 
lowered it into the bottle where it coiled, then spread, 
Page | 551 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




swirling like gas. He corked the bottle with a 
trembling hand and then passed it across the table to 
Harry. 

“Thank you very much, Professor.” 

“You’re a good boy,” said Professor Slughorn, tears 
trickling down his fat cheeks into his walrus 
mustache. “And you’ve got her eyes. ... Just don’t 
think too badly of me once you’ve seen it. ...” 

And he too put his head on his arms, gave a deep 
sigh, and fell asleep. 



Page | 552 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






HORCRUXES 

Harry could feel the Felix Felicis wearing off as he 
crept back into the castle. The front door had 
remained unlocked for him, but on the third floor he 
met Peeves and only narrowly avoided detection by 
diving sideways through one of his shortcuts. By the 
time he got up to the portrait of the Fat Lady and 
pulled off his Invisibility Cloak, he was not surprised 
to find her in a most unhelpful mood. 

“What sort of time do you call this?” 

“I’m really sorry — I had to go out for something 
important — ” 

“Well, the password changed at midnight, so you’ll 
just have to sleep in the corridor, won’t you?” 

“You’re joking!” said Harry. “Why did it have to 
change at midnight?” 



Page | 553 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



“That’s the way it is,” said the Fat Lady. “If you’re 
angry, go and take it up with the headmaster, he’s the 
one who’s tightened security.” 

“Fantastic,” said Harry bitterly, looking around at the 
hard floor. “Really brilliant. Yeah, I would go and take 
it up with Dumbledore if he was here, because he’s 
the one who wanted me to — ” 

“He is here,” said a voice behind Harry. “Professor 
Dumbledore returned to the school an hour ago.” 

Nearly Headless Nick was gliding toward Harry, his 
head wobbling as usual upon his ruff. 

“I had it from the Bloody Baron, who saw him arrive,” 
said Nick. “He appeared, according to the Baron, to be 
in good spirits, though a little tired, of course.” 

“Where is he?” said Harry, his heart leaping. 

“Oh, groaning and clanking up on the Astronomy 
Tower, it’s a favorite pastime of his — ” 

“Not the Bloody Baron — Dumbledore!” 

“Oh — in his office,” said Nick. “I believe, from what 
the Baron said, that he had business to attend to 
before turning in — ” 

“Yeah, he has,” said Harry, excitement blazing in his 
chest at the prospect of telling Dumbledore he had 
secured the memory. He wheeled about and sprinted 
off again, ignoring the Fat Lady who was calling after 
him. 

“Come back! All right, I lied! I was annoyed you woke 
me up! The password’s still ‘tapeworm’!” 



Page | 554 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




But Harry was already hurtling back along the 
corridor and within minutes, he was saying “toffee 
eclairs” to Dumbledore’s gargoyle, which leapt aside, 
permitting Harry entrance onto the spiral staircase. 

“Enter,” said Dumbledore when Harry knocked. He 
sounded exhausted. 

Harry pushed open the door. There was Dumbledore’s 
office, looking the same as ever, but with black, star- 
strewn skies beyond the windows. 

“Good gracious, Harry,” said Dumbledore in surprise. 
“To what do I owe this very late pleasure?” 

“Sir — I’ve got it. I’ve got the memory from Slughorn.” 

Harry pulled out the tiny glass bottle and showed it to 
Dumbledore. For a moment or two, the headmaster 
looked stunned. Then his face split in a wide smile. 

“Harry, this is spectacular news! Very well done 
indeed! I knew you could do it!” 

All thought of the lateness of the hour apparently 
forgotten, he hurried around his desk, took the bottle 
with Slughorn’s memory in his uninjured hand, and 
strode over to the cabinet where he kept the Pensieve. 

“And now,” said Dumbledore, placing the stone basin 
upon his desk and emptying the contents of the bottle 
into it. “Now, at last, we shall see. Harry, quickly ...” 

Harry bowed obediently over the Pensieve and felt his 
feet leave the office floor. . . . Once again he fell 
through darkness and landed in Horace Slughorn’s 
office many years before. 



Page | 555 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




There was the much younger Slughorn, with his 
thick, shiny, straw-colored hair and his gingery-blond 
mustache, sitting again in the comfortable winged 
armchair in his office, his feet resting upon a velvet 
pouffe, a small glass of wine in one hand, the other 
rummaging in a box of crystalized pineapple. And 
there were the half-dozen teenage boys sitting around 
Slughorn with Tom Riddle in the midst of them, 
Marvolo’s gold-and-black ring gleaming on his finger. 

Dumbledore landed beside Harry just as Riddle 
asked, “Sir, is it true that Professor Merrythought is 
retiring?” 

“Tom, Tom, if I knew I couldn’t tell you,” said 
Slughorn, wagging his finger reprovingly at Riddle, 
though winking at the same time. “I must say, I’d like 
to know where you get your information, boy, more 
knowledgeable than half the staff, you are.” 

Riddle smiled; the other boys laughed and cast him 
admiring looks. 

“What with your uncanny ability to know things you 
shouldn’t, and your careful flattery of the people who 
matter — thank you for the pineapple, by the way, 
you’re quite right, it is my favorite — ” 

Several of the boys tittered again. 

“ — I confidently expect you to rise to Minister of 
Magic within twenty years. Fifteen, if you keep 
sending me pineapple, I have excellent contacts at the 
Ministry.” 

Tom Riddle merely smiled as the others laughed 
again. Harry noticed that he was by no means the 
eldest of the group of boys, but that they all seemed 
to look to him as their leader. 

Page | 556 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I don’t know that politics would suit me, sir,” he said 
when the laughter had died away. “I don’t have the 
right kind of background, for one thing.” 

A couple of the boys around him smirked at each 
other. Harry was sure they were enjoying a private 
joke, undoubtedly about what they knew, or 
suspected, regarding their gang leader’s famous 
ancestor. 

“Nonsense,” said Slughorn briskly, “couldn’t be 
plainer you come from decent Wizarding stock, 
abilities like yours. No, you’ll go far, Tom, I’ve never 
been wrong about a student yet.” 

The small golden clock standing upon Slughorn ’s 
desk chimed eleven o’clock behind him and he looked 
around. 

“Good gracious, is it that time already? You’d better 
get going, boys, or we’ll all be in trouble. Lestrange, I 
want your essay by tomorrow or it’s detention. Same 
goes for you, Avery.” 

One by one, the boys filed out of the room. Slughorn 
heaved himself out of his armchair and carried his 
empty glass over to his desk. A movement behind him 
made him look around; Riddle was still standing 
there. 

“Look sharp, Tom, you don’t want to be caught out of 
bed out of hours, and you a prefect ...” 

“Sir, I wanted to ask you something.” 

“Ask away, then, m’boy, ask away. ...” 

“Sir, I wondered what you know about . . . about 
Horcruxes?” 

Page | 557 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Slughorn stared at him, his thick fingers 
absentmindedly caressing the stem of his wine glass. 

“Project for Defense Against the Dark Arts, is it?” 

But Harry could tell that Slughorn knew perfectly well 
that this was not schoolwork. 

“Not exactly, sir,” said Riddle. “I came across the term 
while reading and I didn’t fully understand it.” 

“No ... well ... you’d be hard-pushed to find a book at 
Hogwarts that’ll give you details on Horcruxes, Tom, 
that’s very Dark stuff, very Dark indeed,” said 
Slughorn. 

“But you obviously know all about them, sir? I mean, 
a wizard like you — sorry, I mean, if you can’t tell me, 
obviously — I just knew if anyone could tell me, you 
could — so I just thought I’d ask — ” 

It was very well done, thought Harry, the hesitancy, 
the casual tone, the careful flattery, none of it 
overdone. He, Harry, had had too much experience of 
trying to wheedle information out of reluctant people 
not to recognize a master at work. He could tell that 
Riddle wanted the information very, very much; 
perhaps had been working toward this moment for 
weeks. 

“Well,” said Slughorn, not looking at Riddle, but 
fiddling with the ribbon on top of his box of 
crystalized pineapple, “well, it can’t hurt to give you 
an overview, of course. Just so that you understand 
the term. A Horcrux is the word used for an object in 
which a person has concealed part of their soul.” 

“I don’t quite understand how that works, though, 
sir,” said Riddle. 

Page | 558 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




His voice was carefully controlled, but Harry could 
sense his excitement. 

“Well, you split your soul, you see,” said Slughorn, 
“and hide part of it in an object outside the body. 
Then, even if one’s body is attacked or destroyed, one 
cannot die, for part of the soul remains earthbound 
and undamaged. But of course, existence in such a 
form ...” 

Slughorn ’s face crumpled and Harry found himself 
remembering words he had heard nearly two years 
before: “ I was ripped from my body, I was less than 
spirit, less than the meanest ghost . . . but still, I was 
alive.” 

“... few would want it, Tom, very few. Death would be 
preferable.” 

But Riddle’s hunger was now apparent; his 
expression was greedy, he could no longer hide his 
longing. 

“How do you split your soul?” 

“Well,” said Slughorn uncomfortably, “you must 
understand that the soul is supposed to remain intact 
and whole. Splitting it is an act of violation, it is 
against nature.” 

“But how do you do it?” 

“By an act of evil — the supreme act of evil. By 
committing murder. Killing rips the soul apart. The 
wizard intent upon creating a Horcrux would use the 
damage to his advantage: He would encase the torn 
portion — ” 

“Encase? But how — ?” 

Page | 559 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“There is a spell, do not ask me, I don’t know!” said 
Slughorn, shaking his head like an old elephant 
bothered by mosquitoes. “Do I look as though I have 
tried it — do I look like a killer?” 

“No, sir, of course not,” said Riddle quickly. “I’m sorry 
...I didn’t mean to offend ...” 

“Not at all, not at all, not offended,” said Slughorn 
gruffly. “It’s natural to feel some curiosity about these 
things. ... Wizards of a certain caliber have always 
been drawn to that aspect of magic. ...” 

“Yes, sir,” said Riddle. “What I don’t understand, 
though — just out of curiosity — I mean, would one 
Horcrux be much use? Can you only split your soul 
once? Wouldn’t it be better, make you stronger, to 
have your soul in more pieces, I mean, for instance, 
isn’t seven the most powerfully magical number, 
wouldn’t seven — ?” 

“Merlin’s beard, Tom!” yelped Slughorn. “Seven! Isn’t 
it bad enough to think of killing one person? And in 
any case . . . bad enough to divide the soul . . . but to 
rip it into seven pieces ...” 

Slughorn looked deeply troubled now: He was gazing 
at Riddle as though he had never seen him plainly 
before, and Harry could tell that he was regretting 
entering into the conversation at all. 

“Of course,” he muttered, “this is all hypothetical, 
what we’re discussing, isn’t it? All academic ...” 

“Yes, sir, of course,” said Riddle quickly. 

“But all the same, Tom ... keep it quiet, what I’ve told 
— that’s to say, what we’ve discussed. People 
wouldn’t like to think we’ve been chatting about 

Page | 560 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Horcruxes. It’s a banned subject at Hogwarts, you 
know. ... Dumbledore’s particularly fierce about it. ...” 

“I won’t say a word, sir,” said Riddle, and he left, but 
not before Harry had glimpsed his face, which was 
full of that same wild happiness it had worn when he 
had first found out that he was a wizard, the sort of 
happiness that did not enhance his handsome 
features, but made them, somehow, less human. ... 

“Thank you, Harry,” said Dumbledore quietly. “Let us 
go. ...” ' 

When Harry landed back on the office floor 
Dumbledore was already sitting down behind his 
desk. Harry sat too and waited for Dumbledore to 
speak. 

“I have been hoping for this piece of evidence for a 
very long time,” said Dumbledore at last. “It confirms 
the theory on which I have been working, it tells me 
that I am right, and also how very far there is still to 
go. ...” 

Harry suddenly noticed that every single one of the 
old headmasters and headmistresses in the portraits 
around the walls was awake and listening in on their 
conversation. A corpulent, red-nosed wizard had 
actually taken out an ear trumpet. 

“Well, Harry,” said Dumbledore, “I am sure you 
understood the significance of what we just heard. At 
the same age as you are now, give or take a few 
months, Tom Riddle was doing all he could to find out 
how to make himself immortal.” 

“You think he succeeded then, sir?” asked Harry. “He 
made a Horcrux? And that’s why he didn’t die when 



Page | 561 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




he attacked me? He had a Horcrux hidden 
somewhere? A bit of his soul was safe?” 

“A bit ... or more,” said Dumbledore. “You heard 
Voldemort: What he particularly wanted from Horace 
was an opinion on what would happen to the wizard 
who created more than one Horcrux, what would 
happen to the wizard so determined to evade death 
that he would be prepared to murder many times, rip 
his soul repeatedly, so as to store it in many, 
separately concealed Horcruxes. No book would have 
given him that information. As far as I know — as far, 
I am sure, as Voldemort knew — no wizard had ever 
done more than tear his soul in two.” 

Dumbledore paused for a moment, marshaling his 
thoughts, and then said, “Four years ago, I received 
what I considered certain proof that Voldemort had 
split his soul.” 

“Where?” asked Harry “How?” 

“You handed it to me, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “The 
diary, Riddle’s diary, the one giving instructions on 
how to reopen the Chamber of Secrets.” 

“I don’t understand, sir,” said Harry. 

“Well, although I did not see the Riddle who came out 
of the diary, what you described to me was a 
phenomenon I had never witnessed. A mere memory 
starting to act and think for itself? A mere memory, 
sapping the life out of the girl into whose hands it had 
fallen? No, something much more sinister had lived 
inside that book. ... a fragment of soul, I was almost 
sure of it. The diary had been a Horcrux. But this 
raised as many questions as it answered. 



Page | 562 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“What intrigued and alarmed me most was that that 
diary had been intended as a weapon as much as a 
safeguard.” 

“I still don’t understand,” said Harry. 

“Well, it worked as a Horcrux is supposed to work — 
in other words, the fragment of soul concealed inside 
it was kept safe and had undoubtedly played its part 
in preventing the death of its owner. But there could 
be no doubt that Riddle really wanted that diary read, 
wanted the piece of his soul to inhabit or possess 
somebody else, so that Slytherin’s monster would be 
unleashed again.” 

“Well, he didn’t want his hard work to be wasted,” 
said Harry. “He wanted people to know he was 
Slytherin’s heir, because he couldn’t take credit at the 
time.” 

“Quite correct,” said Dumbledore, nodding. “But don’t 
you see, Harry, that if he intended the diary to be 
passed to, or planted on, some future Hogwarts 
student, he was being remarkably blase about that 
precious fragment of his soul concealed within it. The 
point of a Horcrux is, as Professor Slughorn 
explained, to keep part of the self hidden and safe, 
not to fling it into somebody else’s path and run the 
risk that they might destroy it — as indeed happened: 
That particular fragment of soul is no more; you saw 
to that. 

“The careless way in which Voldemort regarded this 
Horcrux seemed most ominous to me. It suggested 
that he must have made — or been planning to make 
— more Horcruxes, so that the loss of his first would 
not be so detrimental. I did not wish to believe it, but 
nothing else seemed to make sense. 



Page | 563 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Then you told me, two years later, that on the night 
that Voldemort returned to his body, he made a most 
illuminating and alarming statement to his Death 
Eaters. % who have gone further than anybody along 
the path that leads to immortality.’ That was what you 
told me he said. ‘Further than anybody,’ And I thought 
I knew what that meant, though the Death Eaters did 
not. He was referring to his Horcruxes, Horcruxes in 
the plural, Harry, which I do not believe any other 
wizard has ever had. Yet it fitted: Lord Voldemort has 
seemed to grow less human with the passing years, 
and the transformation he has undergone seemed to 
me to be only explicable if his soul was mutilated 
beyond the realms of what we might call ‘usual evil’ 



“So he’s made himself impossible to kill by murdering 
other people?” said Harry. “Why couldn’t he make a 
Sorcerer’s Stone, or steal one, if he was so interested 
in immortality?” 

“Well, we know that he tried to do just that, five years 
ago,” said Dumbledore. “But there are several reasons 
why, I think, a Sorcerer’s Stone would appeal less 
than Horcruxes to Lord Voldemort. 

“While the Elixir of Life does indeed extend life, it 
must be drunk regularly, for all eternity, if the drinker 
is to maintain their immortality. Therefore, Voldemort 
would be entirely dependent on the Elixir, and if it 
ran out, or was contaminated, or if the Stone was 
stolen, he would die just like any other man. 
Voldemort likes to operate alone, remember. I believe 
that he would have found the thought of being 
dependent, even on the Elixir, intolerable. Of course 
he was prepared to drink it if it would take him out of 
the horrible part-life to which he was condemned 
after attacking you, but only to regain a body. 
Thereafter, I am convinced, he intended to continue to 
Page | 564 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




rely on his Horcruxes: He would need nothing more, if 
only he could regain a human form. He was already 
immortal, you see ... or as close to immortal as any 
man can be. 

“But now, Harry, armed with this information, the 
crucial memory you have succeeded in procuring for 
us, we are closer to the secret of finishing Lord 
Voldemort than anyone has ever been before. You 
heard him, Harry: ‘Wouldn’t it be better, make you 
stronger, to have your soul in more pieces ... isn’t 
seven the most powerfully magical number ...’ Isn’t 
seven the most powerfully magical number. Yes, I 
think the idea of a seven-part soul would greatly 
appeal to Lord Voldemort.” 

“He made seven Horcruxes?” said Harry, horror- 
struck, while several of the portraits on the walls 
made similar noises of shock and outrage. “But they 
could be anywhere in the world — hidden — buried or 
invisible — ” 

“I am glad to see you appreciate the magnitude of the 
problem,” said Dumbledore calmly. “But firstly, no, 
Harry, not seven Horcruxes: six. The seventh part of 
his soul, however maimed, resides inside his 
regenerated body. That was the part of him that lived 
a spectral existence for so many years during his 
exile; without that, he has no self at all. That seventh 
piece of soul will be the last that anybody wishing to 
kill Voldemort must attack — the piece that lives in 
his body.” 

“But the six Horcruxes, then,” said Harry, a little 
desperately, “how are we supposed to find them?” 

“You are forgetting . . . you have already destroyed one 
of them. And I have destroyed another.” 



Page | 565 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You have?” said Harry eagerly. 



“Yes indeed,” said Dumbledore, and he raised his 
blackened, burned-looking hand. “The ring, Harry. 
Marvolo’s ring. And a terrible curse there was upon it 
too. Had it not been — forgive me the lack of seemly 
modesty — for my own prodigious skill, and for 
Professor Snape’s timely action when I returned to 
Hogwarts, desperately injured, I might not have lived 
to tell the tale. However, a withered hand does not 
seem an unreasonable exchange for a seventh of 
Voldemort’s soul. The ring is no longer a Horcrux.” 

“But how did you find it?” 

“Well, as you now know, for many years I have made 
it my business to discover as much as I can about 
Voldemort’s past life. I have traveled widely, visiting 
those places he once knew. I stumbled across the ring 
hidden in the ruin of the Gaunts’ house. It seems that 
once Voldemort had succeeded in sealing a piece of 
his soul inside it, he did not want to wear it anymore. 
He hid it, protected by many powerful enchantments, 
in the shack where his ancestors had once lived 
(Morfin having been carted off to Azkaban, of course), 
never guessing that I might one day take the trouble 
to visit the ruin, or that I might be keeping an eye 
open for traces of magical concealment. 

“However, we should not congratulate ourselves too 
heartily. You destroyed the diary and I the ring, but if 
we are right in our theory of a seven-part soul, four 
Horcruxes remain.” 

“And they could be anything?” said Harry. “They 
could be old tin cans or, I dunno, empty potion 
bottles. ...” 



Page | 566 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You are thinking of Portkeys, Harry, which must be 
ordinary objects, easy to overlook. But would Lord 
Voldemort use tin cans or old potion bottles to guard 
his own precious soul? You are forgetting what I have 
showed you. Lord Voldemort liked to collect trophies, 
and he preferred objects with a powerful magical 
history. His pride, his belief in his own superiority, 
his determination to carve for himself a startling place 
in magical history; these things suggest to me that 
Voldemort would have chosen his Horcruxes with 
some care, favoring objects worthy of the honor.” 

“The diary wasn’t that special.” 

“The diary, as you have said yourself, was proof that 
he was the Heir of Slytherin; I am sure that 
Voldemort considered it of stupendous importance.” 

“So, the other Horcruxes?” said Harry. “Do you think 
you know what they are, sir?” 

“I can only guess,” said Dumbledore. “For the reasons 
I have already given, I believe that Lord Voldemort 
would prefer objects that, in themselves, have a 
certain grandeur. I have therefore trawled back 
through Voldemort’s past to see if I can find evidence 
that such artifacts have disappeared around him.” 

“The locket!” said Harry loudly. “Hufflepuff’s cup!” 

“Yes,” said Dumbledore, smiling, “I would be prepared 
to bet — perhaps not my other hand — but a couple 
of fingers, that they became Horcruxes three and 
four. The remaining two, assuming again that he 
created a total of six, are more of a problem, but I will 
hazard a guess that, having secured objects from 
Hufflepuff and Slytherin, he set out to track down 
objects owned by Gryffindor or Ravenclaw. Four 
objects from the four founders would, I am sure, have 
Page | 567 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




exerted a powerful pull over Voldemort’s imagination. 

I cannot answer for whether he ever managed to find 
anything of Ravenclaw’s. I am confident, however, 
that the only known relic of Gryffindor remains safe.” 

Dumbledore pointed his blackened fingers to the wall 
behind him, where a ruby-encrusted sword reposed 
within a glass case. 

“Do you think that’s why he really wanted to come 
back to Hogwarts, sir?” said Harry. “To try and find 
something from one of the other founders?” 

“My thoughts precisely,” said Dumbledore. “But 
unfortunately, that does not advance us much 
further, for he was turned away, or so I believe, 
without the chance to search the school. I am forced 
to conclude that he never fulfilled his ambition of 
collecting four founders’ objects. He definitely had two 
— he may have found three — that is the best we can 
do for now.” 

“Even if he got something of Ravenclaw’s or of 
Gryffindor’s, that leaves a sixth Horcrux,” said Harry, 
counting on his fingers. “Unless he got both?” 

“I don’t think so,” said Dumbledore. “I think I know 
what the sixth Horcrux is. I wonder what you will say 
when I confess that I have been curious for a while 
about the behavior of the snake, Nagini?” 

“The snake?” said Harry, startled. “You can use 
animals as Horcruxes?” 

“Well, it is inadvisable to do so,” said Dumbledore, 
“because to confide a part of your soul to something 
that can think and move for itself is obviously a very 
risky business. However, if my calculations are 
correct, Voldemort was still at least one Horcrux short 
Page | 568 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




of his goal of six when he entered your parents’ house 
with the intention of killing you. 



“He seems to have reserved the process of making 
Horcruxes for particularly significant deaths. You 
would certainly have been that. He believed that in 
killing you, he was destroying the danger the 
prophecy had outlined. He believed he was making 
himself invincible. I am sure that he was intending to 
make his final Horcrux with your death. 

“As we know, he failed. After an interval of some 
years, however, he used Nagini to kill an old Muggle 
man, and it might then have occurred to him to turn 
her into his last Horcrux. She underlines the 
Slytherin connection, which enhances Lord 
Voldemort’s mystique; I think he is perhaps as fond of 
her as he can be of anything; he certainly likes to 
keep her close, and he seems to have an unusual 
amount of control over her, even for a Parselmouth.” 

“So,” said Harry, “the diary’s gone, the ring’s gone. 

The cup, the locket, and the snake are still intact, 
and you think there might be a Horcrux that was 
once Ravenclaw’s or Gryffindor’s?” 

“An admirably succinct and accurate summary, yes,” 
said Dumbledore, bowing his head. 

“So . . . are you still looking for them, sir? Is that where 
you’ve been going when you’ve been leaving the 
school?” 

“Correct,” said Dumbledore. “I have been looking for a 
very long time. I think ... perhaps ... I may be close to 
finding another one. There are hopeful signs.” 

“And if you do,” said Harry quickly, “can I come with 
you and help get rid of it?” 

Page | 569 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore looked at Harry very intently for a 
moment before saying, “Yes, I think so.” 

“I can?” said Harry, thoroughly taken aback. 

“Oh yes,” said Dumbledore, smiling slightly. “I think 
you have earned that right.” 

Harry felt his heart lift. It was very good not to hear 
words of caution and protection for once. The 
headmasters and headmistresses around the walls 
seemed less impressed by Dumbledore’s decision; 
Harry saw a few of them shaking their heads and 
Phineas Nigellus actually snorted. 

“Does Voldemort know when a Horcrux is destroyed, 
sir? Can he feel it?” Harry asked, ignoring the 
portraits. 

“A very interesting question, Harry. I believe not. I 
believe that Voldemort is now so immersed in evil, 
and these crucial parts of himself have been detached 
for so long, he does not feel as we do. Perhaps, at the 
point of death, he might be aware of his loss . . . but he 
was not aware, for instance, that the diary had been 
destroyed until he forced the truth out of Lucius 
Malfoy. When Voldemort discovered that the diary 
had been mutilated and robbed of all its powers, I am 
told that his anger was terrible to behold.” 

“But I thought he meant Lucius Malfoy to smuggle it 
into Hogwarts?” 

“Yes, he did, years ago, when he was sure he would 
be able to create more Horcruxes, but still Lucius was 
supposed to wait for Voldemort’s say-so, and he never 
received it, for Voldemort vanished shortly after giving 
him the diary. 



Page | 570 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No doubt he thought that Lucius would not dare do 
anything with the Horcrux other than guard it 
carefully, but he was counting too much upon 
Lucius’s fear of a master who had been gone for years 
and whom Lucius believed dead. Of course, Lucius 
did not know what the diary really was. I understand 
that Voldemort had told him the diary would cause 
the Chamber of Secrets to reopen because it was 
cleverly enchanted. Had Lucius known he held a 
portion of his master’s soul in his hands, he would 
undoubtedly have treated it with more reverence — 
but instead he went ahead and carried out the old 
plan for his own ends: By planting the diary upon 
Arthur Weasley’s daughter, he hoped to discredit 
Arthur and get rid of a highly incriminating magical 
object in one stroke. Ah, poor Lucius ... what with 
Voldemort ’s fury about the fact that he threw away 
the Horcrux for his own gain, and the fiasco at the 
Ministry last year, I would not be surprised if he is 
not secretly glad to be safe in Azkaban at the 
moment.” 

Harry sat in thought for a moment, then asked, “So if 
all of his Horcruxes are destroyed, Voldemort could be 
killed?” 

“Yes, I think so,” said Dumbledore. “Without his 
Horcruxes, Voldemort will be a mortal man with a 
maimed and diminished soul. Never forget, though, 
that while his soul may be damaged beyond repair, 
his brain and his magical powers remain intact. It will 
take uncommon skill and power to kill a wizard like 
Voldemort even without his Horcruxes.” 

“But I haven’t got uncommon skill and power,” said 
Harry, before he could stop himself. 

“Yes, you have,” said Dumbledore firmly. “You have a 
power that Voldemort has never had. You can — ” 

Page | 571 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I know!” said Harry impatiently. “I can love!” It was 
only with difficulty that he stopped himself adding, 
“Big deal!” 

“Yes, Harry, you can love,” said Dumbledore, who 
looked as though he knew perfectly well what Harry 
had just refrained from saying. “Which, given 
everything that has happened to you, is a great and 
remarkable thing. You are still too young to 
understand how unusual you are, Harry.” 

“So, when the prophecy says that I’ll have ‘power the 
Dark Lord knows not,’ it just means — love?” asked 
Harry, feeling a little let down. 

“Yes — just love,” said Dumbledore. “But Harry, never 
forget that what the prophecy says is only significant 
because Voldemort made it so. I told you this at the 
end of last year. Voldemort singled you out as the 
person who would be most dangerous to him — and 
in doing so, he made you the person who would be 
most dangerous to him!” 

“But it comes to the same — ” 

“No, it doesn’t!” said Dumbledore, sounding impatient 
now. Pointing at Harry with his black, withered hand, 
he said, “You are setting too much store by the 
prophecy!” 

“But,” spluttered Harry, “but you said the prophecy 
means — ” 

“If Voldemort had never heard of the prophecy, would 
it have been fulfilled? Would it have meant anything? 
Of course not! Do you think every prophecy in the 
Hall of Prophecy has been fulfilled?” 



Page | 572 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“But,” said Harry, bewildered, “but last year, you said 
one of us would have to kill the other — ” 

“Harry, Harry, only because Voldemort made a grave 
error, and acted on Professor Trelawney’s words! If 
Voldemort had never murdered your father, would he 
have imparted in you a furious desire for revenge? Of 
course not! If he had not forced your mother to die for 
you, would he have given you a magical protection he 
could not penetrate? Of course not, Harry! Don’t you 
see? Voldemort himself created his worst enemy, just 
as tyrants everywhere do! Have you any idea how 
much tyrants fear the people they oppress? All of 
them realize that, one day, amongst their many 
victims, there is sure to be one who rises against 
them and strikes back! Voldemort is no different! 
Always he was on the lookout for the one who would 
challenge him. He heard the prophecy and he leapt 
into action, with the result that he not only 
handpicked the man most likely to finish him, he 
handed him uniquely deadly weapons!” 

“But — ” 

“It is essential that you understand this!” said 
Dumbledore, standing up and striding about the 
room, his glittering robes swooshing in his wake; 
Harry had never seen him so agitated. “By attempting 
to kill you, Voldemort himself singled out the 
remarkable person who sits here in front of me, and 
gave him the tools for the job! It is Voldemort ’s fault 
that you were able to see into his thoughts, his 
ambitions, that you even understand the snakelike 
language in which he gives orders, and yet, Harry, 
despite your privileged insight into Voldemort’s world 
(which, incidentally, is a gift any Death Eater would 
kill to have), you have never been seduced by the 
Dark Arts, never, even for a second, shown the 



Page | 573 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




slightest desire to become one of Voldemort’s 
followers!” 

“Of course I haven’t!” said Harry indignantly. “He 
killed my mum and dad!” 

“You are protected, in short, by your ability to love!” 
said Dumbledore loudly. “The only protection that can 
possibly work against the lure of power like 
Voldemort’s! In spite of all the temptation you have 
endured, all the suffering, you remain pure of heart, 
just as pure as you were at the age of eleven, when 
you stared into a mirror that reflected your heart’s 
desire, and it showed you only the way to thwart Lord 
Voldemort, and not immortality or riches. Harry, have 
you any idea how few wizards could have seen what 
you saw in that mirror? Voldemort should have 
known then what he was dealing with, but he did not! 

“But he knows it now. You have flitted into Lord 
Voldemort’s mind without damage to yourself, but he 
cannot possess you without enduring mortal agony, 
as he discovered in the Ministry. I do not think he 
understands why, Harry, but then, he was in such a 
hurry to mutilate his own soul, he never paused to 
understand the incomparable power of a soul that is 
untarnished and whole.” 

“But, sir,” said Harry, making valiant efforts not to 
sound argumentative, “it all comes to the same thing, 
doesn’t it? I’ve got to try and kill him, or — ” 

“Got to?” said Dumbledore. “Of course you’ve got to! 
But not because of the prophecy! Because you, 
yourself, will never rest until you’ve tried! We both 
know it! Imagine, please, just for a moment, that you 
had never heard that prophecy! How would you feel 
about Voldemort now? Think!” 



Page | 574 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry watched Dumbledore striding up and down in 
front of him, and thought. He thought of his mother, 
his father, and Sirius. He thought of Cedric Diggory. 
He thought of all the terrible deeds he knew Lord 
Voldemort had done. A flame seemed to leap inside 
his chest, searing his throat. 

“I’d want him finished,” said Harry quietly. “And I’d 
want to do it.” 

“Of course you would!” cried Dumbledore. “You see, 
the prophecy does not mean you have to do anything! 
But the prophecy caused Lord Voldemort to mark you 
as his equal. ... In other words, you are free to choose 
your way, quite free to turn your back on the 
prophecy! But Voldemort continues to set store by the 
prophecy. He will continue to hunt you . . . which 
makes it certain, really, that — ” 

“That one of us is going to end up killing the other,” 
said Harry. “Yes.” 

But he understood at last what Dumbledore had been 
trying to tell him. It was, he thought, the difference 
between being dragged into the arena to face a battle 
to the death and walking into the arena with your 
head held high. Some people, perhaps, would say that 
there was little to choose between the two ways, but 
Dumbledore knew — and so do I, thought Harry, with 
a rush of fierce pride, and so did my parents — that 
there was all the difference in the world. 



Page | 575 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






SECTUMSEMPRA 

Exhausted but delighted with his night’s work, Harry 
told Ron and Hermione everything that had happened 
during next morning’s Charms lesson (having first 
cast the Muffliato spell upon those nearest them). 
They were both satisfyingly impressed by the way he 
had wheedled the memory out of Slughorn and 
positively awed when he told them about Voldemort’s 
Horcruxes and Dumbledore’s promise to take Harry 
along, should he find another one. 

“Wow,” said Ron, when Harry had finally finished 
telling them everything; Ron was waving his wand 
very vaguely in the direction of the ceiling without 
paying the slightest bit of attention to what he was 
doing. “Wow. You’re actually going to go with 
Dumbledore ... and try and destroy ... wow.” 

“Ron, you’re making it snow,” said Hermione 
patiently, grabbing his wrist and redirecting his wand 
away from the ceiling from which, sure enough, large 
white flakes had started to fall. Lavender Brown, 



Page | 576 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



Harry noticed, glared at Hermione from a neighboring 
table through very red eyes, and Hermione 
immediately let go of Ron’s arm. 

“Oh yeah,” said Ron, looking down at his shoulders in 
vague surprise. “Sorry ... looks like we’ve all got 
horrible dandruff now. ...” 

He brushed some of the fake snow off Hermione ’s 
shoulder. Lavender burst into tears. Ron looked 
immensely guilty and turned his back on her. 

“We split up,” he told Harry out of the corner of his 
mouth. “Last night. When she saw me coming out of 
the dormitory with Hermione. Obviously she couldn’t 
see you, so she thought it had just been the two of 
us.” 



“Ah,” said Harry. “Well — you don’t mind it’s over, do 
you?” 

“No,” Ron admitted. “It was pretty bad while she was 
yelling, but at least I didn’t have to finish it.” 

“Coward,” said Hermione, though she looked amused. 
“Well, it was a bad night for romance all around. 
Ginny and Dean split up too, Harry.” 

Harry thought there was a rather knowing look in her 
eye as she told him that, but she could not possibly 
know that his insides were suddenly dancing the 
conga. Keeping his face as immobile and his voice as 
indifferent as he could, he asked, “How come?” 

“Oh, something really silly . . . She said he was always 
trying to help her through the portrait hole, like she 
couldn’t climb in herself ... but they’ve been a bit 
rocky for ages.” 



Page | 577 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry glanced over at Dean on the other side of the 
classroom. He certainly looked unhappy. 

“Of course, this puts you in a bit of a dilemma, 
doesn’t it?” said Hermione. 

“What d’you mean?” said Harry quickly. 

“The Quidditch team,” said Hermione. “If Ginny and 
Dean aren’t speaking ...” 

“Oh — oh yeah,” said Harry. 

“Flitwick,” said Ron in a warning tone. The tiny little 
Charms master was bobbing his way toward them, 
and Hermione was the only one who had managed to 
turn vinegar into wine; her glass flask was full of deep 
crimson liquid, whereas the contents of Harry’s and 
Ron’s were still murky brown. 

“Now, now, boys,” squeaked Professor Flitwick 
reproachfully. “A little less talk, a little more action ... 
Let me see you try. ...” 

Together they raised their wands, concentrating with 
all their might, and pointed them at their flasks. 
Harry’s vinegar turned to ice; Ron’s flask exploded. 

“Yes ... for homework,” said Professor Flitwick, 
reemerging from under the table and pulling shards 
of glass out of the top of his hat, “practice.” 

They had one of their rare joint free periods after 
Charms and walked back to the common room 
together. Ron seemed to be positively lighthearted 
about the end of his relationship with Lavender, and 
Hermione seemed cheery too, though when asked 
what she was grinning about she simply said, “It’s a 



Page | 578 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




nice day.” Neither of them seemed to have noticed 
that a fierce battle was raging inside Harry’s brain: 

She’s Ron’s sister. 

But she’s ditched Dean! 

She’s still Ron’s sister. 

I’m his best mate! 

That’ll make it worse. 

If I talked to him first — 

He’d hit you. 

What if I don’t care? 

He’s your best mate\ 

Harry barely noticed that they were climbing through 
the portrait hole into the sunny common room, and 
only vaguely registered the small group of seventh 
years clustered together there, until Hermione cried, 
“Katie! You’re back! Are you okay?” 

Harry stared: It was indeed Katie Bell, looking 
completely healthy and surrounded by her jubilant 
friends. 

“I’m really well!” she said happily. “They let me out of 
St. Mungo’s on Monday, I had a couple of days at 
home with Mum and Dad and then came back here 
this morning. Leanne was just telling me about 
McLaggen and the last match, Harry. ...” 

“Yeah,” said Harry, “well, now you’re back and Ron’s 
fit, we’ll have a decent chance of thrashing 

Page | 579 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Ravenclaw, which means we could still be in the 
running for the Cup. Listen, Katie ...” 

He had to put the question to her at once; his 
curiosity even drove Ginny temporarily from his 
brain. He dropped his voice as Katie’s friends started 
gathering up their things; apparently they were late 
for Transfiguration. 

"... that necklace ... can you remember who gave it to 
you now?” 

“No,” said Katie, shaking her head ruefully. 
“Everyone’s been asking me, but I haven’t got a clue. 
The last thing I remember was walking into the ladies’ 
in the Three Broomsticks.” 

“You definitely went into the bathroom, then?” said 
Hermione. 

“Well, I know I pushed open the door,” said Katie, “so 
I suppose whoever Imperiused me was standing just 
behind it. After that, my memory’s a blank until 
about two weeks ago in St. Mungo’s. Listen, I’d better 
go, I wouldn’t put it past McGonagall to give me lines 
even if it is my first day back. ...” 

She caught up her bag and books and hurried after 
her friends, leaving Harry, Ron, and Hermione to sit 
down at a window table and ponder what she had told 
them. 

“So it must have been a girl or a woman who gave 
Katie the necklace,” said Hermione, “to be in the 
ladies’ bathroom.” 

“Or someone who looked like a girl or a woman,” said 
Harry. “Don’t forget, there was a cauldron full of 



Page | 580 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Polyjuice Potion at Hogwarts. We know some of it got 
stolen. ...” 

In his mind’s eye, he watched a parade of Crabbes 
and Goyles prance past, all transformed into girls. 

“I think I’m going to take another swig of Felix,” said 
Harry, “and have a go at the Room of Requirement 
again.” 

“That would be a complete waste of potion,” said 
Hermione flatly, putting down the copy of Spellman’s 
Syllabary she had just taken out of her bag. “Luck 
can only get you so far, Harry. The situation with 
Slughorn was different; you always had the ability to 
persuade him, you just needed to tweak the 
circumstances a bit. Luck isn’t enough to get you 
through a powerful enchantment, though. Don’t go 
wasting the rest of that potion! You’ll need all the luck 
you can get if Dumbledore takes you along with him 
...” She dropped her voice to a whisper. 

“Couldn’t we make some more?” Ron asked Harry, 
ignoring Hermione. “It’d be great to have a stock of it. 
... Have a look in the book ...” 

Harry pulled his copy of Advanced Potion-Making out 
of his bag and looked up Felix Felicis. 

“Blimey, it’s seriously complicated,” he said, running 
an eye down the list of ingredients. “And it takes six 
months ... You’ve got to let it stew. ...” 

“Typical,” said Ron. 

Harry was about to put his book away again when he 
noticed the corner of a page folded down; turning to 
it, he saw the Sectumsempra spell, captioned “For 
Enemies,” that he had marked a few weeks 

Page | 581 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




previously. He had still not found out what it did, 
mainly because he did not want to test it around 
Hermione, but he was considering trying it out on 
McLaggen next time he came up behind him 
unawares. 

The only person who was not particularly pleased to 
see Katie Bell back at school was Dean Thomas, 
because he would no longer be required to fill her 
place as Chaser. He took the blow stoically enough 
when Harry told him, merely grunting and shrugging, 
but Harry had the distinct feeling as he walked away 
that Dean and Seamus were muttering mutinously 
behind his back. 

The following fortnight saw the best Quidditch 
practices Harry had known as Captain. His team was 
so pleased to be rid of McLaggen, so glad to have 
Katie back at last, that they were flying extremely 
well. 

Ginny did not seem at all upset about the breakup 
with Dean; on the contrary, she was the life and soul 
of the team. Her imitations of Ron anxiously bobbing 
up and down in front of the goal posts as the Quaffle 
sped toward him, or of Harry bellowing orders at 
McLaggen before being knocked out cold, kept them 
all highly amused. Harry, laughing with the others, 
was glad to have an innocent reason to look at Ginny; 
he had received several more Bludger injuries during 
practice because he had not been keeping his eyes on 
the Snitch. 

The battle still raged inside his head: Ginny or Ron? 
Sometimes he thought that the post-Lavender Ron 
might not mind too much if he asked Ginny out, but 
then he remembered Ron’s expression when he had 
seen her kissing Dean, and was sure that Ron would 



Page | 582 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




consider it base treachery if Harry so much as held 
her hand. ... 

Yet Harry could not help himself talking to Ginny, 
laughing with her, walking back from practice with 
her; however much his conscience ached, he found 
himself wondering how best to get her on her own. It 
would have been ideal if Slughorn had given another 
of his little parties, for Ron would not be around — 
but unfortunately, Slughorn seemed to have given 
them up. Once or twice Harry considered asking for 
Hermione’s help, but he did not think he could stand 
seeing the smug look on her face; he thought he 
caught it sometimes when Hermione spotted him 
staring at Ginny or laughing at her jokes. And to 
complicate matters, he had the nagging worry that if 
he didn’t do it, somebody else was sure to ask Ginny 
out soon: He and Ron were at least agreed on the fact 
that she was too popular for her own good. 

All in all, the temptation to take another gulp of Felix 
Felicis was becoming stronger by the day, for surely 
this was a case for, as Hermione put it, “tweaking the 
circumstances”? The balmy days slid gently through 
May, and Ron seemed to be there at Harry’s shoulder 
every time he saw Ginny. Harry found himself longing 
for a stroke of luck that would somehow cause Ron to 
realize that nothing would make him happier than his 
best friend and his sister falling for each other and to 
leave them alone together for longer than a few 
seconds. There seemed no chance of either while the 
final Quidditch game of the season was looming; Ron 
wanted to talk tactics with Harry all the time and had 
little thought for anything else. 

Ron was not unique in this respect; interest in the 
Gryffindor-Ravenclaw game was running extremely 
high throughout the school, for the match would 
decide the Championship, which was still wide open. 

Page | 583 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




If Gryffindor beat Ravenclaw by a margin of three 
hundred points (a tall order, and yet Harry had never 
known his team to fly better) then they would win the 
Championship. If they won by less than three 
hundred points, they would come second to 
Ravenclaw; if they lost by a hundred points they 
would be third behind Hufflepuff and if they lost by 
more than a hundred, they would be in fourth place 
and nobody, Harry thought, would ever, ever let him 
forget that it had been he who had captained 
Gryffindor to their first bottom-of-the-table defeat in 
two centuries. 

The run-up to this crucial match had all the usual 
features: members of rival Houses attempting to 
intimidate opposing teams in the corridors; 
unpleasant chants about individual players being 
rehearsed loudly as they passed; the team members 
themselves either swaggering around enjoying all the 
attention or else dashing into bathrooms between 
classes to throw up. Somehow, the game had become 
inextricably linked in Harry’s mind with success or 
failure in his plans for Ginny. He could not help 
feeling that if they won by more than three hundred 
points, the scenes of euphoria and a nice loud after- 
match party might be just as good as a hearty swig of 
Felix Felicis. 

In the midst of all his preoccupations, Harry had not 
forgotten his other ambition: finding out what Malfoy 
was up to in the Room of Requirement. He was still 
checking the Marauder’s Map, and as he was unable 
to locate Malfoy on it, deduced that Malfoy was still 
spending plenty of time within the room. Although 
Harry was losing hope that he would ever succeed in 
getting inside the Room of Requirement, he attempted 
it whenever he was in the vicinity, but no matter how 
he reworded his request, the wall remained firmly 
doorless. 

Page | 584 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




A few days before the match against Ravenclaw, 

Harry found himself walking down to dinner alone 
from the common room, Ron having rushed off into a 
nearby bathroom to throw up yet again, and 
Hermione having dashed off to see Professor Vector 
about a mistake she thought she might have made in 
her last Arithmancy essay. More out of habit than 
anything, Harry made his usual detour along the 
seventh-floor corridor, checking the Marauder’s Map 
as he went. For a moment he could not find Malfoy 
anywhere and assumed he must indeed be inside the 
Room of Requirement again, but then he saw Malfoy’s 
tiny, labeled dot standing in a boys’ bathroom on the 
floor below, accompanied, not by Crabbe or Goyle, 
but by Moaning Myrtle. 

Harry only stopped staring at this unlikely coupling 
when he walked right into a suit of armor. The loud 
crash brought him out of his reverie; hurrying from 
the scene lest Filch turn up, he dashed down the 
marble staircase and along the passageway below. 
Outside the bathroom, he pressed his ear against the 
door. He could not hear anything. He very quietly 
pushed the door open. 

Draco Malfoy was standing with his back to the door, 
his hands clutching either side of the sink, his white- 
blond head bowed. 

“Don’t,” crooned Moaning Myrtle’s voice from one of 
the cubicles. “Don’t ... tell me what’s wrong ... I can 
help you. ...” 

“No one can help me,” said Malfoy. His whole body 
was shaking. “I can’t do it. ... I can’t. ... It won’t work 
... and unless I do it soon ... he says he’ll kill me. ...” 

And Harry realized, with a shock so huge it seemed to 
root him to the spot, that Malfoy was crying — 

Page | 585 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




actually crying — tears streaming down his pale face 
into the grimy basin. Malfoy gasped and gulped and 
then, with a great shudder, looked up into the 
cracked mirror and saw Harry staring at him over his 
shoulder. 

Malfoy wheeled around, drawing his wand. 
Instinctively, Harry pulled out his own. Malfoy’s hex 
missed Harry by inches, shattering the lamp on the 
wall beside him; Harry threw himself sideways, 
thought Levicorpus\ and flicked his wand, but Malfoy 
blocked the jinx and raised his wand for another — 

“No! No! Stop it!” squealed Moaning Myrtle, her voice 
echoing loudly around the tiled room. “Stop! STOP!” 

There was a loud bang and the bin behind Harry 
exploded; Harry attempted a Leg-Locker Curse that 
backfired off the wall behind Malfoy’s ear and 
smashed the cistern beneath Moaning Myrtle, who 
screamed loudly; water poured everywhere and Harry 
slipped as Malfoy, his face contorted, cried, “Cruci — ” 

“ SECTUMSEMPRAl” bellowed Harry from the floor, 
waving his wand wildly. 

Blood spurted from Malfoy’s face and chest as though 
he had been slashed with an invisible sword. He 
staggered backward and collapsed onto the 
waterlogged floor with a great splash, his wand falling 
from his limp right hand. 

“No — ” gasped Harry. 

Slipping and staggering, Harry got to his feet and 
plunged toward Malfoy, whose face was now shining 
scarlet, his white hands scrabbling at his blood- 
soaked chest. 



Page | 586 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No — I didn’t — ” 



Harry did not know what he was saying; he fell to his 
knees beside Malfoy, who was shaking uncontrollably 
in a pool of his own blood. Moaning Myrtle let out a 
deafening scream: “MURDER! MURDER IN THE 
BATHROOM! MURDER!” 

The door banged open behind Harry and he looked 
up, terrified: Snape had burst into the room, his face 
livid. Pushing Harry roughly aside, he knelt over 
Malfoy, drew his wand, and traced it over the deep 
wounds Harry’s curse had made, muttering an 
incantation that sounded almost like song. The flow 
of blood seemed to ease; Snape wiped the residue 
from Malfoy’s face and repeated his spell. Now the 
wounds seemed to be knitting. 

Harry was still watching, horrified by what he had 
done, barely aware that he too was soaked in blood 
and water. Moaning Myrtle was still sobbing and 
wailing overhead. When Snape had performed his 
countercurse for the third time, he half-lifted Malfoy 
into a standing position. 

“You need the hospital wing. There may be a certain 
amount of scarring, but if you take dittany 
immediately we might avoid even that. ... Come. ...” 

He supported Malfoy across the bathroom, turning at 
the door to say in a voice of cold fury, “And you, 

Potter ... You wait here for me.” 

It did not occur to Harry for a second to disobey. He 
stood up slowly, shaking, and looked down at the wet 
floor. There were bloodstains floating like crimson 
flowers across its surface. He could not even find it in 
himself to tell Moaning Myrtle to be quiet, as she 



Page | 587 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




continued to wail and sob with increasingly evident 
enjoyment. 



Snape returned ten minutes later. He stepped into the 
bathroom and closed the door behind him. 

“Go,” he said to Myrtle, and she swooped back into 
her toilet at once, leaving a ringing silence behind 
her. 

“I didn’t mean it to happen,” said Harry at once. His 
voice echoed in the cold, watery space. “I didn’t know 
what that spell did.” 

But Snape ignored this. “Apparently I underestimated 
you, Potter,” he said quietly. “Who would have 
thought you knew such Dark Magic? Who taught you 
that spell?” 

“I — read about it somewhere.” 

“Where?” 

“It was — a library book,” Harry invented wildly. “I 
can’t remember what it was call — ” 

“Liar,” said Snape. Harry’s throat went dry. He knew 
what Snape was going to do and he had never been 
able to prevent it. ... 

The bathroom seemed to shimmer before his eyes; he 
struggled to block out all thought, but try as he 
might, the Half-Blood Prince’s copy of Advanced 
Potion-Making swam hazily to the forefront of his 
mind. 

And then he was staring at Snape again, in the midst 
of this wrecked, soaked bathroom. He stared into 



Page | 588 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Snape’s black eyes, hoping against hope that Snape 
had not seen what he feared, but — 

“Bring me your schoolbag,” said Snape softly, “and all 
of your schoolbooks. All of them. Bring them to me 
here. Now!” 

There was no point arguing. Harry turned at once and 
splashed out of the bathroom. Once in the corridor, 
he broke into a run toward Gryffindor Tower. Most 
people were walking the other way; they gaped at him, 
drenched in water and blood, but he answered none 
of the questions fired at him as he ran past. 

He felt stunned; it was as though a beloved pet had 
turned suddenly savage; what had the Prince been 
thinking to copy such a spell into his book? And what 
would happen when Snape saw it? Would he tell 
Slughorn — Harry’s stomach churned — how Harry 
had been achieving such good results in Potions all 
year? Would he confiscate or destroy the book that 
had taught Harry so much . . . the book that had 
become a kind of guide and friend? Harry could not 
let it happen. ... He could not ... 

“Where Ve you — ? Why are you soaking — ? Is that 
blood?” 

Ron was standing at the top of the stairs, looking 
bewildered at the sight of Harry. 

“I need your book,” Harry panted. “Your Potions book. 
Quick ... give it to me ...” 

“But what about the Half-Blood — ” 

“I’ll explain later!” 



Page | 589 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Ron pulled his copy of Advanced Potion-Making out of 
his bag and handed it over; Harry sprinted off past 
him and back to the common room. Here, he seized 
his schoolbag, ignoring the amazed looks of several 
people who had already finished their dinner, threw 
himself back out of the portrait hole, and hurtled off 
along the seventh-floor corridor. 

He skidded to a halt beside the tapestry of dancing 
trolls, closed his eyes, and began to walk. 

I need a place to hide my book. ... I need a place to 
hide my book. ... I need a place to hide my book. . . . 

Three times he walked up and down in front of the 
stretch of blank wall. When he opened his eyes, there 
it was at last: the door to the Room of Requirement. 
Harry wrenched it open, flung himself inside, and 
slammed it shut. 

He gasped. Despite his haste, his panic, his fear of 
what awaited him back in the bathroom, he could not 
help but be overawed by what he was looking at. He 
was standing in a room the size of a large cathedral, 
whose high windows were sending shafts of light 
down upon what looked like a city with towering 
walls, built of what Harry knew must be objects 
hidden by generations of Hogwarts inhabitants. There 
were alleyways and roads bordered by teetering piles 
of broken and damaged furniture, stowed away, 
perhaps, to hide the evidence of mishandled magic, or 
else hidden by castle-proud house-elves. There were 
thousands and thousands of books, no doubt banned 
or graffitied or stolen. There were winged catapults 
and Fanged Frisbees, some still with enough life in 
them to hover halfheartedly over the mountains of 
other forbidden items; there were chipped bottles of 
congealed potions, hats, jewels, cloaks; there were 
what looked like dragon eggshells, corked bottles 
Page | 590 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




whose contents still shimmered evilly, several rusting 
swords, and a heavy, bloodstained axe. 

Harry hurried forward into one of the many alleyways 
between all this hidden treasure. He turned right past 
an enormous stuffed troll, ran on a short way, took a 
left at the broken Vanishing Cabinet in which 
Montague had got lost the previous year, finally 
pausing beside a large cupboard that seemed to have 
had acid thrown at its blistered surface. He opened 
one of the cupboard’s creaking doors: It had already 
been used as a hiding place for something in a cage 
that had long since died; its skeleton had five legs. He 
stuffed the Half-Blood Prince’s book behind the cage 
and slammed the door. He paused for a moment, his 
heart thumping horribly, gazing around at all the 
clutter. ... Would he be able to find this spot again 
amidst all this junk? Seizing the chipped bust of an 
ugly old warlock from on top of a nearby crate, he 
stood it on top of the cupboard where the book was 
now hidden, perched a dusty old wig and a tarnished 
tiara on the statue’s head to make it more distinctive, 
then sprinted back through the alleyways of hidden 
junk as fast as he could go, back to the door, back 
out onto the corridor, where he slammed the door 
behind him, and it turned at once back into stone. 

Harry ran flat-out toward the bathroom on the floor 
below, cramming Ron’s copy of Advanced Potion- 
Making into his bag as he did so. A minute later, he 
was back in front of Snape, who held out his hand 
wordlessly for Harry’s schoolbag. Harry handed it 
over, panting, a searing pain in his chest, and waited. 

One by one, Snape extracted Harry’s books and 
examined them. Finally, the only book left was the 
Potions book, which he looked at very carefully before 
speaking. 



Page | 591 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“This is your copy of Advanced Potion-Making, is it, 
Potter?” 

“Yes,” said Harry, still breathing hard. 

“You’re quite sure of that, are you, Potter?” 

“Yes,” said Harry, with a touch more defiance. 

“This is the copy of Advanced Potion-Making that you 
purchased from Flourish and Blotts?” 

“Yes,” said Harry firmly. 

“Then why,” asked Snape, “does it have the name 
‘Roonil Wazlib’ written inside the front cover?” 

Harry’s heart missed a beat. “That’s my nickname,” 
he said. 

“Your nickname,” repeated Snape. 

“Yeah ... that’s what my friends call me,” said Harry. 

“I understand what a nickname is,” said Snape. The 
cold, black eyes were boring once more into Harry’s; 
he tried not to look into them. Close your mind. ... 
Close your mind. . . . But he had never learned how to 
do it properly. . . . 

“Do you know what I think, Potter?” said Snape, very 
quietly. “I think that you are a liar and a cheat and 
that you deserve detention with me every Saturday 
until the end of term. What do you think, Potter?” 

“I — I don’t agree, sir,” said Harry, still refusing to 
look into Snape ’s eyes. 



Page | 592 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, we shall see how you feel after your 
detentions,” said Snape. “Ten o’clock Saturday 
morning, Potter. My office.” 

“But sir ...” said Harry, looking up desperately. 
“Quidditch ... the last match of the ...” 

“Ten o’clock,” whispered Snape, with a smile that 
showed his yellow teeth. “Poor Gryffindor ... fourth 
place this year, I fear ...” 

And he left the bathroom without another word, 
leaving Harry to stare into the cracked mirror, feeling 
sicker, he was sure, than Ron had ever felt in his life. 

“I won’t say ‘I told you so,’ ” said Hermione, an hour 
later in the common room. 

“Leave it, Hermione,” said Ron angrily. 

Harry had never made it to dinner; he had no appetite 
at all. He had just finished telling Ron, Hermione, and 
Ginny what had happened, not that there seemed to 
have been much need. The news had traveled very 
fast: Apparently Moaning Myrtle had taken it upon 
herself to pop up in every bathroom in the castle to 
tell the story; Malfoy had already been visited in the 
hospital wing by Pansy Parkinson, who had lost no 
time in vilifying Harry far and wide, and Snape had 
told the staff precisely what had happened. Harry had 
already been called out of the common room to 
endure fifteen highly unpleasant minutes in the 
company of Professor McGonagall, who had told him 
he was lucky not to have been expelled and that she 
supported wholeheartedly Snape ’s punishment of 
detention every Saturday until the end of term. 



Page | 593 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I told you there was something wrong with that 
Prince person,” Hermione said, evidently unable to 
stop herself. “And I was right, wasn’t I?” 

“No, I don’t think you were,” said Harry stubbornly. 

He was having a bad enough time without Hermione 
lecturing him; the looks on the Gryffindor team’s 
faces when he had told them he would not be able to 
play on Saturday had been the worst punishment of 
all. He could feel Ginny’s eyes on him now but did not 
meet them; he did not want to see disappointment or 
anger there. He had just told her that she would be 
playing Seeker on Saturday and that Dean would be 
rejoining the team as Chaser in her place. Perhaps, if 
they won, Ginny and Dean would make up during the 
post-match euphoria. ... The thought went through 
Harry like an icy knife. ... 

“Harry,” said Hermione, “how can you still stick up 
for that book when that spell — ” 

“Will you stop harping on about the book!” snapped 
Harry. “The Prince only copied it out! It’s not like he 
was advising anyone to use it! For all we know, he 
was making a note of something that had been used 
against him!” 

“I don’t believe this,” said Hermione. “You’re actually 
defending — ” 

“I’m not defending what I did!” said Harry quickly. “I 
wish I hadn’t done it, and not just because I’ve got 
about a dozen detentions. You know I wouldn’t’ve 
used a spell like that, not even on Malfoy, but you 
can’t blame the Prince, he hadn’t written ‘try this out, 
it’s really good’ — he was just making notes for 
himself, wasn’t he, not for anyone else. ...” 



Page | 594 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Are you telling me,” said Hermione, “that you’re 
going to go back — ?” 

“And get the book? Yeah, I am,” said Harry forcefully. 
“Listen, without the Prince I’d never have won the 
Felix Felicis. I’d never have known how to save Ron 
from poisoning, I’d never have — ” 

“ — got a reputation for Potions brilliance you don’t 
deserve,” said Hermione nastily. 

“Give it a rest, Hermione!” said Ginny, and Harry was 
so amazed, so grateful, he looked up. “By the sound 
of it, Malfoy was trying to use an Unforgivable Curse, 
you should be glad Harry had something good up his 
sleeve!” 

“Well, of course I’m glad Harry wasn’t cursed!” said 
Hermione, clearly stung. “But you can’t call that 
Sectumsempra spell good, Ginny, look where it’s 
landed him! And I’d have thought, seeing what this 
has done to your chances in the match — ” 

“Oh, don’t start acting as though you understand 
Quidditch,” snapped Ginny, “you’ll only embarrass 
yourself.” 

Harry and Ron stared: Hermione and Ginny, who had 
always got on together very well, were now sitting 
with their arms folded, glaring in opposite directions. 
Ron looked nervously at Harry, then snatched up a 
book at random and hid behind it. Harry, however, 
little though he knew he deserved it, felt unbelievably 
cheerful all of a sudden, even though none of them 
spoke again for the rest of the evening. 

His lightheartedness was short-lived. There were 
Slytherin taunts to be endured next day, not to 
mention much anger from fellow Gryffindors, who 

Page | 595 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




were most unhappy that their Captain had got 
himself banned from the final match of the season. By 
Saturday morning, whatever he might have told 
Hermione, Harry would have gladly exchanged all the 
Felix Felicis in the world to be walking down to the 
Quidditch pitch with Ron, Ginny, and the others. It 
was almost unbearable to turn away from the mass of 
students streaming out into the sunshine, all of them 
wearing rosettes and hats and brandishing banners 
and scarves, to descend the stone steps into the 
dungeons and walk until the distant sounds of the 
crowd were quite obliterated, knowing that he would 
not be able to hear a word of commentary or a cheer 
or groan. 

“Ah, Potter,” said Snape, when Harry had knocked on 
his door and entered the unpleasantly familiar office 
that Snape, despite teaching floors above now, had 
not vacated; it was as dimly lit as ever and the same 
slimy dead objects were suspended in colored potions 
all around the walls. Ominously, there were many 
cobwebbed boxes piled on a table where Harry was 
clearly supposed to sit; they had an aura of tedious, 
hard, and pointless work about them. 

“Mr. Filch has been looking for someone to clear out 
these old files,” said Snape softly. “They are the 
records of other Hogwarts wrongdoers and their 
punishments. Where the ink has grown faint, or the 
cards have suffered damage from mice, we would like 
you to copy out the crimes and punishments afresh 
and, making sure that they are in alphabetical order, 
replace them in the boxes. You will not use magic.” 

“Right, Professor,” said Harry, with as much contempt 
as he could put into the last three syllables. 

“I thought you could start,” said Snape, a malicious 
smile on his lips, “with boxes one thousand and 

Page | 596 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




twelve to one thousand and fifty-six. You will find 
some familiar names in there, which should add 
interest to the task. Here, you see ...” 

He pulled out a card from one of the topmost boxes 
with a flourish and read, “ ‘James Potter and Sirius 
Black. Apprehended using an illegal hex upon Bertram 
Aubrey. Aubrey’s head twice normal size. Double 
detention.’ ” Snape sneered. “It must be such a 
comfort to think that, though they are gone, a record 
of their great achievements remains. ...” 

Harry felt the familiar boiling sensation in the pit of 
his stomach. Biting his tongue to prevent himself 
retaliating, he sat down in front of the boxes and 
pulled one toward him. 

It was, as Harry had anticipated, useless, boring 
work, punctuated (as Snape had clearly planned) with 
the regular jolt in the stomach that meant he had just 
read his father or Sirius’s names, usually coupled 
together in various petty misdeeds, occasionally 
accompanied by those of Remus Lupin and Peter 
Pettigrew. And while he copied out all their various 
offenses and punishments, he wondered what was 
going on outside, where the match would have just 
started . . . Ginny playing Seeker against Cho . . . 

Harry glanced again and again at the large clock 
ticking on the wall. It seemed to be moving half as 
fast as a regular clock; perhaps Snape had bewitched 
it to go extra slowly? He could not have been here for 
only half an hour ... an hour ... an hour and a half. . . . 

Harry’s stomach started rumbling when the clock 
showed half past twelve. Snape, who had not spoken 
at all since setting Harry his task, finally looked up at 
ten past one. 



Page | 597 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I think that will do,” he said coldly. “Mark the place 
you have reached. You will continue at ten o’clock 
next Saturday.” 

“Yes, sir.” 

Harry stuffed a bent card into the box at random and 
hurried out of the door before Snape could change his 
mind, racing back up the stone steps, straining his 
ears to hear a sound from the pitch, but all was quiet. 
...It was over, then. ... 

He hesitated outside the crowded Great Hall, then ran 
up the marble staircase; whether Gryffindor had won 
or lost, the team usually celebrated or commiserated 
in their own common room. 

“ Quid agis?” he said tentatively to the Fat Lady, 
wondering what he would find inside. 

Her expression was unreadable as she replied, “You’ll 
see.” 

And she swung forward. 

A roar of celebration erupted from the hole behind 
her. Harry gaped as people began to scream at the 
sight of him; several hands pulled him into the room. 

“We won!” yelled Ron, bounding into sight and 
brandishing the silver Cup at Harry. “We won! Four 
hundred and fifty to a hundred and forty! We won!” 

Harry looked around; there was Ginny running 
toward him; she had a hard, blazing look in her face 
as she threw her arms around him. And without 
thinking, without planning it, without worrying about 
the fact that fifty people were watching, Harry kissed 
her. 

Page | 598 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




After several long moments — or it might have been 
half an hour — or possibly several sunlit days — they 
broke apart. The room had gone very quiet. Then 
several people wolf-whistled and there was an 
outbreak of nervous giggling. Harry looked over the 
top of Ginny’s head to see Dean Thomas holding a 
shattered glass in his hand, and Romilda Vane 
looking as though she might throw something. 
Hermione was beaming, but Harry’s eyes sought Ron. 
At last he found him, still clutching the Cup and 
wearing an expression appropriate to having been 
clubbed over the head. For a fraction of a second they 
looked at each other, then Ron gave a tiny jerk of the 
head that Harry understood to mean, Well — if you 
must. 

The creature in his chest roaring in triumph, he 
grinned down at Ginny and gestured wordlessly out of 
the portrait hole. A long walk in the grounds seemed 
indicated, during which — if they had time — they 
might discuss the match. 



Page | 599 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






THE SEER OVERHEARD 

The fact that Harry Potter was going out with Ginny 
Weasley seemed to interest a great number of people, 
most of them girls, yet Harry found himself newly and 
happily impervious to gossip over the next few weeks. 
After all, it made a very nice change to be talked 
about because of something that was making him 
happier than he could remember being for a very long 
time, rather than because he had been involved in 
horrific scenes of Dark Magic. 

“You’d think people had better things to gossip 
about,” said Ginny, as she sat on the common room 
floor, leaning against Harry’s legs and reading the 
Daily Prophet “Three dementor attacks in a week, and 
all Romilda Vane does is ask me if it’s true you’ve got 
a hippogriff tattooed across your chest.” 

Ron and Hermione both roared with laughter. Harry 
ignored them. 

“What did you tell her?” 



Page | 600 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



“I told her it’s a Hungarian Horntail,” said Ginny, 
turning a page of the newspaper idly. “Much more 
macho.” 



“Thanks,” said Harry, grinning. “And what did you tell 
her Ron’s got?” 

“A Pygmy Puff, but I didn’t say where.” 

Ron scowled as Hermione rolled around laughing. 

“Watch it,” he said, pointing warningly at Harry and 
Ginny. “Just because I’ve given my permission doesn’t 
mean I can’t withdraw it — ” 

“ ‘Your permission,’ ” scoffed Ginny. “Since when did 
you give me permission to do anything? Anyway, you 
said yourself you’d rather it was Harry than Michael 
or Dean.” 

“Yeah, I would,” said Ron grudgingly. “And just as 
long as you don’t start snogging each other in public 



“You filthy hypocrite! What about you and Lavender, 
thrashing around like a pair of eels all over the 
place?” demanded Ginny. 

But Ron’s tolerance was not to be tested much as 
they moved into June, for Harry and Ginny’s time 
together was becoming increasingly restricted. 

Ginny’s O.W.L.s were approaching and she was 
therefore forced to study for hours into the night. On 
one such evening, when Ginny had retired to the 
library, and Harry was sitting beside the window in 
the common room, supposedly finishing his 
Herbology homework but in reality reliving a 
particularly happy hour he had spent down by the 
lake with Ginny at lunchtime, Hermione dropped into 
Page | 601 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




the seat between him and Ron with an unpleasantly 
purposeful look on her face. 

“I want to talk to you, Harry.” 

“What about?” said Harry suspiciously. Only the 
previous day, Hermione had told him off for 
distracting Ginny when she ought to be working hard 
for her examinations. 

“The so-called Half-Blood Prince.” 

“Oh, not again,” he groaned. “Will you please drop it?” 

He had not dared to return to the Room of 
Requirement to retrieve his book, and his 
performance in Potions was suffering accordingly 
(though Slughorn, who approved of Ginny, had 
jocularly attributed this to Harry being lovesick). But 
Harry was sure that Snape had not yet given up hope 
of laying hands on the Prince’s book, and was 
determined to leave it where it was while Snape 
remained on the lookout. 

“I’m not dropping it,” said Hermione firmly, “until 
you’ve heard me out. Now, I’ve been trying to find out 
a bit about who might make a hobby of inventing 
Dark spells — ” 

“He didn’t make a hobby of it — ” 

“He, he — who says it’s a he?” 

“We’ve been through this,” said Harry crossly. “Prince, 
Hermione, PrinceV’ 

“Right!” said Hermione, red patches blazing in her 
cheeks as she pulled a very old piece of newsprint out 



Page | 602 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




of her pocket and slammed it down on the table in 
front of Harry. “Look at that! Look at the picture!” 



Harry picked up the crumbling piece of paper and 
stared at the moving photograph, yellowed with age; 
Ron leaned over for a look too. The picture showed a 
skinny girl of around fifteen. She was not pretty; she 
looked simultaneously cross and sullen, with heavy 
brows and a long, pallid face. Underneath the 
photograph was the caption: EILEEN PRINCE, 
CAPTAIN OF THE HOGWARTS GOBSTONES TEAM. 

“So?” said Harry, scanning the short news item to 
which the picture belonged; it was a rather dull story 
about interschool competitions. 

“Her name was Eileen Prince. Prince, Harry.” 

They looked at each other, and Harry realized what 
Hermione was trying to say. He burst out laughing. 

“No way.” 

“What?” 

“You think she was the Half-Blood ... ? Oh, come on.” 

“Well, why not? Harry, there aren’t any real princes in 
the Wizarding world! It’s either a nickname, a made- 
up title somebody’s given themselves, or it could be 
their actual name, couldn’t it? No, listen! If, say, her 
father was a wizard whose surname was Prince, and 
her mother was a Muggle, then that would make her 
a “half-blood Prince’!” 

“Yeah, very ingenious, Hermione ...” 

“But it would! Maybe she was proud of being half a 
Prince!” 

Page | 603 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Listen, Hermione, I can tell it’s not a girl. I can just 
tell.” 



“The truth is that you don’t think a girl would have 
been clever enough,” said Hermione angrily. 

“How can I have hung round with you for five years 
and not think girls are clever?” said Harry, stung by 
this. “It’s the way he writes, I just know the Prince 
was a bloke, I can tell. This girl hasn’t got anything to 
do with it. Where did you get this anyway?” 

“The library,” said Hermione predictably. “There’s a 
whole collection of old Prophets up there. Well, I’m 
going to find out more about Eileen Prince if I can.” 

“Enjoy yourself,” said Harry irritably. 

“I will,” said Hermione. “And the first place I’ll look,” 
she shot at him, as she reached the portrait hole, “is 
records of old Potions awards!” 

Harry scowled after her for a moment, then continued 
his contemplation of the darkening sky. 

“She’s just never got over you outperforming her in 
Potions,” said Ron, returning to his copy of A 
Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi. 

“You don’t think I’m mad, wanting that book back, do 
you?” 

“ ’Course not,” said Ron robustly. “He was a genius, 
the Prince. Anyway ... without his bezoar tip ...” He 
drew his finger significantly across his own throat. “I 
wouldn’t be here to discuss it, would I? I mean, I’m 
not saying that spell you used on Malfoy was great — ” 

“Nor am I,” said Harry quickly. 

Page | 604 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“But he healed all right, didn’t he? Back on his feet in 
no time.” 

“Yeah,” said Harry; this was perfectly true, although 
his conscience squirmed slightly all the same. 

“Thanks to Snape ...” 

“You still got detention with Snape this Saturday?” 
Ron continued. 

“Yeah, and the Saturday after that, and the Saturday 
after that,” sighed Harry. “And he’s hinting now that if 
I don’t get all the boxes done by the end of term, we’ll 
carry on next year.” 

He was finding these detentions particularly irksome 
because they cut into the already limited time he 
could have been spending with Ginny. Indeed, he had 
frequently wondered lately whether Snape did not 
know this, for he was keeping Harry later and later 
every time, while making pointed asides about Harry 
having to miss the good weather and the varied 
opportunities it offered. 

Harry was shaken from these bitter reflections by the 
appearance at his side of Jimmy Peakes, who was 
holding out a scroll of parchment. 

“Thanks, Jimmy ... Hey, it’s from Dumbledore!” said 
Harry excitedly, unrolling the parchment and 
scanning it. “He wants me to go to his office as quick 
as I can!” 

They stared at each other. 

“Blimey,” whispered Ron. “You don’t reckon ... he 
hasn’t found ... ?” 



Page | 605 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Better go and see, hadn’t I?” said Harry, jumping to 
his feet. 

He hurried out of the common room and along the 
seventh floor as fast as he could, passing nobody but 
Peeves, who swooped past in the opposite direction, 
throwing bits of chalk at Harry in a routine sort of 
way and cackling loudly as he dodged Harry’s 
defensive jinx. Once Peeves had vanished, there was 
silence in the corridors; with only fifteen minutes left 
until curfew, most people had already returned to 
their common rooms. 

And then Harry heard a scream and a crash. He 
stopped in his tracks, listening. 

“How — dare — you — aaaaargh!” 

The noise was coming from a corridor nearby; Harry 
sprinted toward it, his wand at the ready, hurtled 
around another corner, and saw Professor Trelawney 
sprawled upon the floor, her head covered in one of 
her many shawls, several sherry bottles lying beside 
her, one broken. 

“Professor — ” 

Harry hurried forward and helped Professor 
Trelawney to her feet. Some of her glittering beads 
had become entangled with her glasses. She hiccuped 
loudly, patted her hair, and pulled herself up on 
Harry’s helping arm. 

“What happened, Professor?” 

“You may well ask!” she said shrilly. “I was strolling 
along, brooding upon certain dark portents I happen 
to have glimpsed ...” 



Page | 606 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




But Harry was not paying much attention. He had 
just noticed where they were standing: There on the 
right was the tapestry of dancing trolls, and on the 
left, that smoothly impenetrable stretch of stone wall 
that concealed — 

“Professor, were you trying to get into the Room of 
Requirement?” 

"... omens I have been vouchsafed — what?” She 
looked suddenly shifty. 

“The Room of Requirement,” repeated Harry. “Were 
you trying to get in there?” 

“I — well — I didn’t know students knew about — ” 

“Not all of them do,” said Harry. “But what happened? 
You screamed. ... It sounded as though you were 
hurt. ...” 

“I — well,” said Professor Trelawney, drawing her 
shawls around her defensively and staring down at 
him with her vastly magnified eyes. “I wished to — ah 
— deposit certain — um — personal items in the 
room. ...” And she muttered something about “nasty 
accusations.” 

“Right,” said Harry, glancing down at the sherry 
bottles. “But you couldn’t get in and hide them?” 

He found this very odd; the room had opened for him, 
after all, when he had wanted to hide the Half-Blood 
Prince’s book. 

“Oh, I got in all right,” said Professor Trelawney, 
glaring at the wall. “But there was somebody already 
in there.” 



Page | 607 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Somebody in — ? Who?” demanded Harry. “Who was 
in there?” 

“I have no idea,” said Professor Trelawney, looking 
slightly taken aback at the urgency in Harry’s voice. “I 
walked into the room and I heard a voice, which has 
never happened before in all my years of hiding — of 
using the room, I mean.” 

“A voice? Saying what?” 

“I don’t know that it was saying anything,” said 
Professor Trelawney. “It was ... whooping.” 

“ Whooping?” 

“Gleefully,” she said, nodding. 

Harry stared at her. 

“Was it male or female?” 

“I would hazard a guess at male,” said Professor 
Trelawney. 

“And it sounded happy?” 

“Very happy,” said Professor Trelawney sniffily. 

“As though it was celebrating?” 

“Most definitely.” 

“And then — ?” 

“And then I called out Who’s there?’ ” 

“You couldn’t have found out who it was without 
asking?” Harry asked her, slightly frustrated. 

Page | 608 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“The Inner Eye,” said Professor Trelawney with 
dignity, straightening her shawls and many strands of 
glittering beads, “was fixed upon matters well outside 
the mundane realms of whooping voices.” 

“Right,” said Harry hastily; he had heard about 
Professor Trelawney’s Inner Eye all too often before. 
“And did the voice say who was there?” 

“No, it did not,” she said. “Everything went pitch- 
black and the next thing I knew, I was being hurled 
headfirst out of the room!” 

“And you didn’t see that coming?” said Harry, unable 
to help himself. 

“No, I did not, as I say, it was pitch — ” She stopped 
and glared at him suspiciously. 

“I think you’d better tell Professor Dumbledore,” said 
Harry. “He ought to know Malfoy’s celebrating — I 
mean, that someone threw you out of the room.” 

To his surprise, Professor Trelawney drew herself up 
at this suggestion, looking haughty. 

“The headmaster has intimated that he would prefer 
fewer visits from me,” she said coldly. “I am not one to 
press my company upon those who do not value it. If 
Dumbledore chooses to ignore the warnings the cards 
show — ” Her bony hand closed suddenly around 
Harry’s wrist. “Again and again, no matter how I lay 
them out — ” And she pulled a card dramatically from 
underneath her shawls. “ — the lightning-struck 
tower,” she whispered. “Calamity. Disaster. Coming 
nearer all the time ...” 

“Right,” said Harry again. “Well ... I still think you 
should tell Dumbledore about this voice, and 

Page | 609 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




everything going dark and being thrown out of the 
room. ...” 

“You think so?” Professor Trelawney seemed to 
consider the matter for a moment, but Harry could 
tell that she liked the idea of retelling her little 
adventure. 

“I’m going to see him right now,” said Harry. “I’ve got 
a meeting with him. We could go together.” 

“Oh, well, in that case,” said Professor Trelawney with 
a smile. She bent down, scooped up her sherry 
bottles, and dumped them unceremoniously in a large 
blue-and-white vase standing in a nearby niche. 

“I miss having you in my classes, Harry,” she said 
soulfully as they set off together. “You were never 
much of a Seer ... but you were a wonderful Object 



Harry did not reply; he had loathed being the Object 
of Professor Trelawney’s continual predictions of 
doom. 

“I am afraid,” she went on, “that the nag — I’m sorry, 
the centaur — knows nothing of cartomancy. I asked 
him — one Seer to another — had he not, too, sensed 
the distant vibrations of coming catastrophe? But he 
seemed to find me almost comical. Yes, comical!” 

Her voice rose rather hysterically, and Harry caught a 
powerful whiff of sherry even though the bottles had 
been left behind. 

“Perhaps the horse has heard people say that I have 
not inherited my great-great-grandmother’s gift. 

Those rumors have been bandied about by the jealous 
for years. You know what I say to such people, Harry? 

Page | 610 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




Would Dumbledore have let me teach at this great 
school, put so much trust in me all these years, had I 
not proved myself to him?” 

Harry mumbled something indistinct. 

“I well remember my first interview with Dumbledore,” 
went on Professor Trelawney, in throaty tones. “He 
was deeply impressed, of course, deeply impressed. ... 
I was staying at the Hog’s Head, which I do not 
advise, incidentally — bedbugs, dear boy — but funds 
were low. Dumbledore did me the courtesy of calling 
upon me in my room. He questioned me. ... I must 
confess that, at first, I thought he seemed ill-disposed 
toward Divination . . . and I remember I was starting to 
feel a little odd, I had not eaten much that day ... but 
then ...” 

And now Harry was paying attention properly for the 
first time, for he knew what had happened then: 
Professor Trelawney had made the prophecy that had 
altered the course of his whole life, the prophecy 
about him and Voldemort. 

"... but then we were rudely interrupted by Severus 
Snape!” 

“What?” 

“Yes, there was a commotion outside the door and it 
flew open, and there was that rather uncouth barman 
standing with Snape, who was waffling about having 
come the wrong way up the stairs, although I’m afraid 
that I myself rather thought he had been 
apprehended eavesdropping on my interview with 
Dumbledore — you see, he himself was seeking a job 
at the time, and no doubt hoped to pick up tips! Well, 
after that, you know, Dumbledore seemed much more 
disposed to give me a job, and I could not help 
Page | 611 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




thinking, Harry, that it was because he appreciated 
the stark contrast between my own unassuming 
manners and quiet talent, compared to the pushing, 
thrusting young man who was prepared to listen at 
keyholes — Harry, dear?” 

She looked back over her shoulder, having only just 
realized that Harry was no longer with her; he had 
stopped walking and they were now ten feet from each 
other. 

“Harry?” she repeated uncertainly. 

Perhaps his face was white to make her look so 
concerned and frightened. Harry was standing stock- 
still as waves of shock crashed over him, wave after 
wave, obliterating everything except the information 
that had been kept from him for so long. . . . 

It was Snape who had overheard the prophecy. It was 
Snape who had carried the news of the prophecy to 
Voldemort. Snape and Peter Pettigrew together had 
sent Voldemort hunting after Lily and James and 
their son. ... 

Nothing else mattered to Harry just now. 

“Harry?” said Professor Trelawney again. “Harry — I 
thought we were going to see the headmaster 
together?” 

“You stay here,” said Harry through numb lips. 

“But dear ... I was going to tell him how I was 
assaulted in the Room of — ” 

“You stay here!” Harry repeated angrily. 



Page | 612 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




She looked alarmed as he ran past her, around the 
corner into Dumbledore’s corridor, where the lone 
gargoyle stood sentry. Harry shouted the password at 
the gargoyle and ran up the moving spiral staircase 
three steps at a time. He did not knock upon 
Dumbledore’s door, he hammered; and the calm voice 
answered, “Enter” after Harry had already flung 
himself into the room. 

Fawkes the phoenix looked around, his bright black 
eyes gleaming with reflected gold from the sunset 
beyond the windows. Dumbledore was standing at the 
window looking out at the grounds, a long, black 
traveling cloak in his arms. 

“Well, Harry, I promised that you could come with 
me.” 

For a moment or two, Harry did not understand; the 
conversation with Trelawney had driven everything 
else out of his head and his brain seemed to be 
moving very slowly. 

“Come . . . with you ... ?” 

“Only if you wish it, of course.” 

“If I ...” 

And then Harry remembered why he had been eager 
to come to Dumbledore’s office in the first place. 
“You’ve found one? You’ve found a Horcrux?” 

“I believe so.” 

Rage and resentment fought shock and excitement: 
For several moments, Harry could not speak. 

“It is natural to be afraid,” said Dumbledore. 

Page | 613 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




‘Tm not scared!” said Harry at once, and it was 
perfectly true; fear was one emotion he was not 
feeling at all. “Which Horcrux is it? Where is it?” 

“I am not sure which it is — though I think we can 
rule out the snake — but I believe it to be hidden in a 
cave on the coast many miles from here, a cave I have 
been trying to locate for a very long time: the cave in 
which Tom Riddle once terrorized two children from 
his orphanage on their annual trip; you remember?” 

“Yes,” said Harry. “How is it protected?” 

“I do not know; I have suspicions that may be entirely 
wrong.” Dumbledore hesitated, then said, “Harry, I 
promised you that you could come with me, and I 
stand by that promise, but it would be very wrong of 
me not to warn you that this will be exceedingly 
dangerous.” 

“I’m coming,” said Harry, almost before Dumbledore 
had finished speaking. Boiling with anger at Snape, 
his desire to do something desperate and risky had 
increased tenfold in the last few minutes. This 
seemed to show on Harry’s face, for Dumbledore 
moved away from the window and looked more closely 
at Harry, a slight crease between his silver eyebrows. 

“What has happened to you?” 

“Nothing,” lied Harry promptly. 

“What has upset you?” 

“I’m not upset.” 

“Harry, you were never a good Occlumens — ” 



The word was the spark that ignited Harry’s fury. 

Page | 614 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Snape!” he said, very loudly, and Fawkes gave a soft 
squawk behind them. “Snape’s what’s happened! He 
told Voldemort about the prophecy, it was him, he 
listened outside the door, Trelawney told me!” 

Dumbledore’s expression did not change, but Harry 
thought his face whitened under the bloody tinge cast 
by the setting sun. For a long moment, Dumbledore 
said nothing. “When did you find out about this?” he 
asked at last. 

“Just now!” said Harry, who was refraining from 
yelling with enormous difficulty. And then, suddenly, 
he could not stop himself. “AND YOU LET HIM 
TEACH HERE AND HE TOLD VOLDEMORT TO GO 
AFTER MY MUM AND DAD!” 

Breathing hard as though he was fighting, Harry 
turned away from Dumbledore, who still had not 
moved a muscle, and paced up and down the study, 
rubbing his knuckles in his hand and exercising 
every last bit of restraint to prevent himself knocking 
things over. He wanted to rage and storm at 
Dumbledore, but he also wanted to go with him to try 
and destroy the Horcrux; he wanted to tell him that 
he was a foolish old man for trusting Snape, but he 
was terrified that Dumbledore would not take him 
along unless he mastered his anger. ... 

“Harry,” said Dumbledore quietly. “Please listen to 
me.” 

It was as difficult to stop his relentless pacing as to 
refrain from shouting. Harry paused, biting his lip, 
and looked into Dumbledore’s lined face. 

“Professor Snape made a terrible — ” 



Page | 615 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t tell me it was a mistake, sir, he was listening 
at the door!” 

“Please let me finish.” Dumbledore waited until Harry 
had nodded curtly, then went on. “Professor Snape 
made a terrible mistake. He was still in Lord 
Voldemort’s employ on the night he heard the first 
half of Professor Trelawney’s prophecy. Naturally, he 
hastened to tell his master what he had heard, for it 
concerned his master most deeply. But he did not 
know — he had no possible way of knowing — which 
boy Voldemort would hunt from then onward, or that 
the parents he would destroy in his murderous quest 
were people that Professor Snape knew, that they 
were your mother and father — ” 

Harry let out a yell of mirthless laughter. 

“He hated my dad like he hated Sirius! Haven’t you 
noticed, Professor, how the people Snape hates tend 
to end up dead?” 

“You have no idea of the remorse Professor Snape felt 
when he realized how Lord Voldemort had interpreted 
the prophecy, Harry. I believe it to be the greatest 
regret of his life and the reason that he returned — ” 

“But he’s a very good Occlumens, isn’t he, sir?” said 
Harry, whose voice was shaking with the effort of 
keeping it steady. “And isn’t Voldemort convinced that 
Snape’s on his side, even now? Professor ... how can 
you be sure Snape’s on our side?” 

Dumbledore did not speak for a moment; he looked as 
though he was trying to make up his mind about 
something. At last he said, “I am sure. I trust Severus 
Snape completely.” 



Page | 616 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry breathed deeply for a few moments in an effort 
to steady himself. It did not work. 

“Well, I don’t!” he said, as loudly as before. “He’s up to 
something with Draco Malfoy right now, right under 
your nose, and you still — ” 

“We have discussed this, Harry,” said Dumbledore, 
and now he sounded stern again. “I have told you my 
views.” 

“You’re leaving the school tonight, and I’ll bet you 
haven’t even considered that Snape and Malfoy might 
decide to — ” 

“To what?” asked Dumbledore, his eyebrows raised. 
“What is it that you suspect them of doing, precisely?” 

“I ... they’re up to something!” said Harry, and his 
hands curled into fists as he said it. “Professor 
Trelawney was just in the Room of Requirement, 
trying to hide her sherry bottles, and she heard 
Malfoy whooping, celebrating! He’s trying to mend 
something dangerous in there and if you ask me, he’s 
fixed it at last and you’re about to just walk out of 
school without — ” 

“Enough,” said Dumbledore. He said it quite calmly, 
and yet Harry fell silent at once; he knew that he had 
finally crossed some invisible line. “Do you think that 
I have once left the school unprotected during my 
absences this year? I have not. Tonight, when I leave, 
there will again be additional protection in place. 
Please do not suggest that I do not take the safety of 
my students seriously, Harry.” 

“I didn’t — ” mumbled Harry, a little abashed, but 
Dumbledore cut across him. 



Page | 617 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I do not wish to discuss the matter any further.” 

Harry bit back his retort, scared that he had gone too 
far, that he had ruined his chance of accompanying 
Dumbledore, but Dumbledore went on, “Do you wish 
to come with me tonight?” 

“Yes,” said Harry at once. 

“Very well, then: Listen.” Dumbledore drew himself up 
to his full height. “I take you with me on one 
condition: that you obey any command I might give 
you at once, and without question.” 

“Of course.” 

“Be sure to understand me, Harry. I mean that you 
must follow even such orders as ‘run,’ ‘hide,’ or ‘go 
back.’ Do I have your word?” 

“I — yes, of course.” 

“If I tell you to hide, you will do so?” 

“Yes.” 

“If I tell you to flee, you will obey?” 

“Yes.” 

“If I tell you to leave me and save yourself, you will do 
as I tell you? 



“Harry?” 

They looked at each other for a moment. 



Page | 618 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes, sir.” 



“Very good. Then I wish you to go and fetch your 
Invisibility Cloak and meet me in the entrance hall in 
five minutes’ time.” 

Dumbledore turned back to look out of the fiery 
window; the sun was now a ruby red glare along the 
horizon. Harry walked quickly from the office and 
down the spiral staircase. His mind was oddly clear 
all of a sudden. He knew what to do. 

Ron and Hermione were sitting together in the 
common room when he came back. “What does he 
want?” Hermione said at once. “Harry, are you okay?” 
she added anxiously. 

“I’m fine,” said Harry shortly, racing past them. He 
dashed up the stairs and into his dormitory, where he 
flung open his trunk and pulled out the Marauder’s 
Map and a pair of balled-up socks. Then he sped back 
down the stairs and into the common room, skidding 
to a halt where Ron and Hermione sat, looking 
stunned. 

“I’ve got to be quick,” Harry panted. “Dumbledore 
thinks I’m getting my Invisibility Cloak. Listen. ...” 

Quickly he told them where he was going and why. He 
did not pause either for Hermione ’s gasps of horror or 
for Ron’s hasty questions; they could work out the 
finer details for themselves later. 

“... so you see what this means?” Harry finished at a 
gallop. “Dumbledore won’t be here tonight, so 
Malfoy’s going to have another clear shot at whatever 
he’s up to. No, listen to me!” he hissed angrily, as both 
Ron and Hermione showed every sign of interrupting. 
“I know it was Malfoy celebrating in the Room of 
Page | 619 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Requirement. Here — ” He shoved the Marauder’s Map 
into Hermione’s hands. “You’ve got to watch him and 
you’ve got to watch Snape too. Use anyone else who 
you can rustle up from the D.A., Hermione, those 
contact Galleons will still work, right? Dumbledore 
says he’s put extra protection in the school, but if 
Snape ’s involved, he’ll know what Dumbledore ’s 
protection is, and how to avoid it — but he won’t be 
expecting you lot to be on the watch, will he?” 

“Harry — ” began Hermione, her eyes huge with fear. 

“I haven’t got time to argue,” said Harry curtly. “Take 
this as well — ” 

He thrust the socks into Ron’s hands. 

“Thanks,” said Ron. “Er — why do I need socks?” 

“You need what’s wrapped in them, it’s the Felix 
Felicis. Share it between yourselves and Ginny too. 
Say good-bye to her for me. I’d better go, 

Dumbledore ’s waiting — ” 

“No!” said Hermione, as Ron unwrapped the tiny little 
bottle of golden potion, looking awestruck. “We don’t 
want it, you take it, who knows what you’re going to 
be facing?” 

“I’ll be fine, I’ll be with Dumbledore,” said Harry. “I 
want to know you lot are okay. ... Don’t look like that, 
Hermione, I’ll see you later. ...” 

And he was off, hurrying back through the portrait 
hole and toward the entrance hall. 

Dumbledore was waiting beside the oaken front 
doors. He turned as Harry came skidding out onto the 



Page | 620 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




topmost stone step, panting hard, a searing stitch in 
his side. 

“I would like you to wear your cloak, please,” said 
Dumbledore, and he waited until Harry had thrown it 
on before saying, “Very good. Shall we go?” 

Dumbledore set off at once down the stone steps, his 
own traveling cloak barely stirring in the still summer 
air. Harry hurried alongside him under the Invisibility 
Cloak, still panting and sweating rather a lot. 

“But what will people think when they see you 
leaving, Professor?” Harry asked, his mind on Malfoy 
and Snape. 

“That I am off into Hogsmeade for a drink,” said 
Dumbledore lightly. “I sometimes offer Rosmerta my 
custom, or else visit the Hog’s Head ... or I appear to. 
It is as good a way as any of disguising one’s true 
destination.” 

They made their way down the drive in the gathering 
twilight. The air was full of the smells of warm grass, 
lake water, and wood smoke from Hagrid’s cabin. It 
was difficult to believe that they were heading for 
anything dangerous or frightening. 

“Professor,” said Harry quietly, as the gates at the 
bottom of the drive came into view, “will we be 
Apparating?” 

“Yes,” said Dumbledore. “You can Apparate now, I 
believe?” 

“Yes,” said Harry, “but I haven’t got a license.” 



Page | 621 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




He felt it best to be honest; what if he spoiled 
everything by turning up a hundred miles from where 
he was supposed to go? 

“No matter,” said Dumbledore, “I can assist you 
again.” 

They turned out of the gates into the twilit, deserted 
lane to Hogsmeade. Darkness descended fast as they 
walked, and by the time they reached the High Street 
night was falling in earnest. Lights twinkled from 
windows over shops and as they neared the Three 
Broomsticks they heard raucous shouting. 

“ — and stay out!” shouted Madam Rosmerta, forcibly 
ejecting a grubby-looking wizard. “Oh, hello, Albus ... 
You’re out late ...” 

“Good evening, Rosmerta, good evening ... forgive me, 
I’m off to the Hog’s Head. ... No offense, but I feel like 
a quieter atmosphere tonight. ...” 

A minute later they turned the corner into the side 
street where the Hog’s Head’s sign creaked a little, 
though there was no breeze. In contrast to the Three 
Broomsticks, the pub appeared to be completely 
empty. 

“It will not be necessary for us to enter,” muttered 
Dumbledore, glancing around. “As long as nobody 
sees us go ... now place your hand upon my arm, 
Harry. There is no need to grip too hard, I am merely 
guiding you. On the count of three ... One ... two ... 
three ...” 

Harry turned. At once, there was that horrible 
sensation that he was being squeezed through a thick 
rubber tube; he could not draw breath, every part of 
him was being compressed almost past endurance 

Page | 622 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




and then, just when he thought he must suffocate, 
the invisible bands seemed to burst open, and he was 
standing in cool darkness, breathing in lungfuls of 
fresh, salty air. 



Page | 623 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 







THE CAVE 

Harry could smell salt and hear rushing waves; a 
light, chilly breeze ruffled his hair as he looked out at 
moonlit sea and star-strewn sky. He was standing 
upon a high outcrop of dark rock, water foaming and 
churning below him. He glanced over his shoulder. A 
towering cliff stood behind them, a sheer drop, black 
and faceless. A few large chunks of rock, such as the 
one upon which Harry and Dumbledore were 
standing, looked as though they had broken away 
from the cliff face at some point in the past. It was a 
bleak, harsh view, the sea and the rock unrelieved by 
any tree or sweep of grass or sand. 

“What do you think?” asked Dumbledore. He might 
have been asking Harry’s opinion on whether it was a 
good site for a picnic. 

“They brought the kids from the orphanage here?” 
asked Harry, who could not imagine a less cozy spot 
for a day trip. 



Page | 624 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



“Not here, precisely,” said Dumbledore. “There is a 
village of sorts about halfway along the cliffs behind 
us. I believe the orphans were taken there for a little 
sea air and a view of the waves. No, I think it was only 
ever Tom Riddle and his youthful victims who visited 
this spot. No Muggle could reach this rock unless 
they were uncommonly good mountaineers, and boats 
cannot approach the cliffs, the waters around them 
are too dangerous. I imagine that Riddle climbed 
down; magic would have served better than ropes. 

And he brought two small children with him, 
probably for the pleasure of terrorizing them. I think 
the journey alone would have done it, don’t you?” 

Harry looked up at the cliff again and felt goose 
bumps. 

“But his final destination — and ours — lies a little 
farther on. Come.” 

Dumbledore beckoned Harry to the very edge of the 
rock where a series of jagged niches made footholds 
leading down to boulders that lay half-submerged in 
water and closer to the cliff. It was a treacherous 
descent and Dumbledore, hampered slightly by his 
withered hand, moved slowly. The lower rocks were 
slippery with seawater. Harry could feel flecks of cold 
salt spray hitting his face. 

“Lumos,” said Dumbledore, as he reached the boulder 
closest to the cliff face. A thousand flecks of golden 
light sparkled upon the dark surface of the water a 
few feet below where he crouched; the black wall of 
rock beside him was illuminated too. 

“You see?” said Dumbledore quietly, holding his wand 
a little higher. Harry saw a fissure in the cliff into 
which dark water was swirling. 



Page | 625 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You will not object to getting a little wet?” 

“No,” said Harry. 

“Then take off your Invisibility Cloak — there is no 
need for it now — and let us take the plunge.” 

And with the sudden agility of a much younger man, 
Dumbledore slid from the boulder, landed in the sea, 
and began to swim, with a perfect breaststroke, 
toward the dark slit in the rock face, his lit wand held 
in his teeth. Harry pulled off his cloak, stuffed it into 
his pocket, and followed. 

The water was icy; Harry’s waterlogged clothes 
billowed around him and weighed him down. Taking 
deep breaths that filled his nostrils with the tang of 
salt and seaweed, he struck out for the shimmering, 
shrinking light now moving deeper into the cliff. 

The fissure soon opened into a dark tunnel that Harry 
could tell would be filled with water at high tide. The 
slimy walls were barely three feet apart and 
glimmered like wet tar in the passing light of 
Dumbledore ’s wand. A little way in, the passageway 
curved to the left, and Harry saw that it extended far 
into the cliff. He continued to swim in Dumbledore ’s 
wake, the tips of his benumbed fingers brushing the 
rough, wet rock. 

Then he saw Dumbledore rising out of the water 
ahead, his silver hair and dark robes gleaming. When 
Harry reached the spot he found steps that led into a 
large cave. He clambered up them, water streaming 
from his soaking clothes, and emerged, shivering 
uncontrollably, into the still and freezing air. 



Page | 626 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore was standing in the middle of the cave, 
his wand held high as he turned slowly on the spot, 
examining the walls and ceiling. 

“Yes, this is the place,” said Dumbledore. 

“How can you tell?” Harry spoke in a whisper. 

“It has known magic,” said Dumbledore simply. 

Harry could not tell whether the shivers he was 
experiencing were due to his spine-deep coldness or 
to the same awareness of enchantments. He watched 
as Dumbledore continued to revolve on the spot, 
evidently concentrating on things Harry could not see. 

“This is merely the antechamber, the entrance hall,” 
said Dumbledore after a moment or two. “We need to 
penetrate the inner place. ... Now it is Lord 
Voldemort’s obstacles that stand in our way, rather 
than those nature made. ...” 

Dumbledore approached the wall of the cave and 
caressed it with his blackened fingertips, murmuring 
words in a strange tongue that Harry did not 
understand. Twice Dumbledore walked right around 
the cave, touching as much of the rough rock as he 
could, occasionally pausing, running his fingers 
backward and forward over a particular spot, until 
finally he stopped, his hand pressed flat against the 
wall. 

“Here,” he said. “We go on through here. The entrance 
is concealed.” 

Harry did not ask how Dumbledore knew. He had 
never seen a wizard work things out like this, simply 
by looking and touching; but Harry had long since 



Page | 627 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




learned that bangs and smoke were more often the 
marks of ineptitude than expertise. 

Dumbledore stepped back from the cave wall and 
pointed his wand at the rock. For a moment, an 
arched outline appeared there, blazing white as 
though there was a powerful light behind the crack. 

“You’ve d-done it!” said Harry through chattering 
teeth, but before the words had left his lips the 
outline had gone, leaving the rock as bare and solid 
as ever. Dumbledore looked around. 

“Harry, I’m so sorry, I forgot,” he said; he now pointed 
his wand at Harry and at once, Harry’s clothes were 
as warm and dry as if they had been hanging in front 
of a blazing fire. 

“Thank you,” said Harry gratefully, but Dumbledore 
had already turned his attention back to the solid 
cave wall. He did not try any more magic, but simply 
stood there staring at it intently, as though something 
extremely interesting was written on it. Harry stayed 
quite still; he did not want to break Dumbledore’s 
concentration. Then, after two solid minutes, 
Dumbledore said quietly, “Oh, surely not. So crude.” 

“What is it, Professor?” 

“I rather think,” said Dumbledore, putting his 
uninjured hand inside his robes and drawing out a 
short silver knife of the kind Harry used to chop 
potion ingredients, “that we are required to make 
payment to pass.” 

“Payment?” said Harry. “You’ve got to give the door 
something?” 



Page | 628 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes,” said Dumbledore. “Blood, if I am not much 
mistaken.” 

“Blood?” 

“I said it was crude,” said Dumbledore, who sounded 
disdainful, even disappointed, as though Voldemort 
had fallen short of the standards Dumbledore 
expected. “The idea, as I am sure you will have 
gathered, is that your enemy must weaken him- or 
herself to enter. Once again, Lord Voldemort fails to 
grasp that there are much more terrible things than 
physical injury.” 

“Yeah, but still, if you can avoid it ...” said Harry, who 
had experienced enough pain not to be keen for more. 

“Sometimes, however, it is unavoidable,” said 
Dumbledore, shaking back the sleeve of his robes and 
exposing the forearm of his injured hand. 

“Professor!” protested Harry, hurrying forward as 
Dumbledore raised his knife. “Ill do it, I’m — ” 

He did not know what he was going to say — younger, 
fitter? But Dumbledore merely smiled. There was a 
flash of silver, and a spurt of scarlet; the rock face 
was peppered with dark, glistening drops. 

“You are very kind, Harry,” said Dumbledore, now 
passing the tip of his wand over the deep cut he had 
made in his own arm, so that it healed instantly, just 
as Snape had healed Malfoy’s wounds. “But your 
blood is worth more than mine. Ah, that seems to 
have done the trick, doesn’t it?” 

The blazing silver outline of an arch had appeared in 
the wall once more, and this time it did not fade 
away: The blood-spattered rock within it simply 

Page | 629 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




vanished, leaving an opening into what seemed total 
darkness. 

“After me, I think,” said Dumbledore, and he walked 
through the archway with Harry on his heels, lighting 
his own wand hastily as he went. 

An eerie sight met their eyes: They were standing on 
the edge of a great black lake, so vast that Harry 
could not make out the distant banks, in a cavern so 
high that the ceiling too was out of sight. A misty 
greenish light shone far away in what looked like the 
middle of the lake; it was reflected in the completely 
still water below. The greenish glow and the light from 
the two wands were the only things that broke the 
otherwise velvety blackness, though their rays did not 
penetrate as far as Harry would have expected. The 
darkness was somehow denser than normal 
darkness. 

“Let us walk,” said Dumbledore quietly. “Be very 
careful not to step into the water. Stay close to me.” 

He set off around the edge of the lake, and Harry 
followed close behind him. Their footsteps made 
echoing, slapping sounds on the narrow rim of rock 
that surrounded the water. On and on they walked, 
but the view did not vary: on one side of them, the 
rough cavern wall, on the other, the boundless 
expanse of smooth, glassy blackness, in the very 
middle of which was that mysterious greenish glow. 
Harry found the place and the silence oppressive, 
unnerving. 

“Professor?” he said finally. “Do you think the 
Horcrux is here?” 

“Oh yes,” said Dumbledore. “Yes, I’m sure it is. The 
question is, how do we get to it?” 

Page | 630 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“We couldn’t ... we couldn’t just try a Summoning 
Charm?” Harry said, sure that it was a stupid 
suggestion. But he was much keener than he was 
prepared to admit on getting out of this place as soon 
as possible. 

“Certainly we could,” said Dumbledore, stopping so 
suddenly that Harry almost walked into him. “Why 
don’t you do it?” 

“Me? Oh ... okay ...” 

Harry had not expected this, but cleared his throat 
and said loudly, wand aloft, “Accio Horcruxl” 

With a noise like an explosion, something very large 
and pale erupted out of the dark water some twenty 
feet away; before Harry could see what it was, it had 
vanished again with a crashing splash that made 
great, deep ripples on the mirrored surface. Harry 
leapt backward in shock and hit the wall; his heart 
was still thundering as he turned to Dumbledore. 

“What was that?” 

“Something, I think, that is ready to respond should 
we attempt to seize the Horcrux.” 

Harry looked back at the water. The surface of the 
lake was once more shining black glass: The ripples 
had vanished unnaturally fast; Harry’s heart, 
however, was still pounding. 

“Did you think that would happen, sir?” 

“I thought something would happen if we made an 
obvious attempt to get our hands on the Horcrux. 

That was a very good idea, Harry; much the simplest 
way of finding out what we are facing.” 

Page | 631 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince -J.K. Rowling 




“But we don’t know what the thing was,” said Harry, 
looking at the sinisterly smooth water. 



“What the things are, you mean,” said Dumbledore. “I 
doubt very much that there is only one of them. Shall 
we walk on?” 

“Professor?” 

“Yes, Harry?” 

“Do you think we’re going to have to go into the lake?” 

“Into it? Only if we are very unfortunate.” 

“You don’t think the Horcrux is at the bottom?” 

“Oh no ... I think the Horcrux is in the middle.” 

And Dumbledore pointed toward the misty green light 
in the center of the lake. 

“So we’re going to have to cross the lake to get to it?” 
“Yes, I think so.” 

Harry did not say anything. His thoughts were all of 
water monsters, of giant serpents, of demons, kelpies, 
and sprites. ... 

“Aha,” said Dumbledore, and he stopped again; this 
time, Harry really did walk into him; for a moment he 
toppled on the edge of the dark water, and 
Dumbledore’s uninjured hand closed tightly around 
his upper arm, pulling him back. “So sorry, Harry, I 
should have given warning. Stand back against the 
wall, please; I think I have found the place.” 



Page | 632 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry had no idea what Dumbledore meant; this 
patch of dark bank was exactly like every other bit as 
far as he could tell, but Dumbledore seemed to have 
detected something special about it. This time he was 
running his hand, not over the rocky wall, but 
through the thin air, as though expecting to find and 
grip something invisible. 

“Oho,” said Dumbledore happily, seconds later. His 
hand had closed in midair upon something Harry 
could not see. Dumbledore moved closer to the water; 
Harry watched nervously as the tips of Dumbledore ’s 
buckled shoes found the utmost edge of the rock rim. 
Keeping his hand clenched in midair, Dumbledore 
raised his wand with the other and tapped his fist 
with the point. 

Immediately a thick coppery green chain appeared 
out of thin air, extending from the depths of the water 
into Dumbledore ’s clenched hand. Dumbledore 
tapped the chain, which began to slide through his 
fist like a snake, coiling itself on the ground with a 
clinking sound that echoed noisily off the rocky walls, 
pulling something from the depths of the black water. 
Harry gasped as the ghostly prow of a tiny boat broke 
the surface, glowing as green as the chain, and 
floated, with barely a ripple, toward the place on the 
bank where Harry and Dumbledore stood. 

“How did you know that was there?” Harry asked in 
astonishment. 

“Magic always leaves traces,” said Dumbledore, as the 
boat hit the bank with a gentle bump, “sometimes 
very distinctive traces. I taught Tom Riddle. I know 
his style.” 

“Is ... is this boat safe?” 



Page | 633 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh yes, I think so. Voldemort needed to create a 
means to cross the lake without attracting the wrath 
of those creatures he had placed within it in case he 
ever wanted to visit or remove his Horcrux.” 

“So the things in the water won’t do anything to us if 
we cross in Voldemort’s boat?” 

“I think we must resign ourselves to the fact that they 
will, at some point, realize we are not Lord Voldemort. 
Thus far, however, we have done well. They have 
allowed us to raise the boat.” 

“But why have they let us?” asked Harry, who could 
not shake off the vision of tentacles rising out of the 
dark water the moment they were out of sight of the 
bank. 

“Voldemort would have been reasonably confident 
that none but a very great wizard would have been 
able to find the boat,” said Dumbledore. “I think he 
would have been prepared to risk what was, to his 
mind, the most unlikely possibility that somebody 
else would find it, knowing that he had set other 
obstacles ahead that only he would be able to 
penetrate. We shall see whether he is right.” 

Harry looked down into the boat. It really was very 
small. 

“It doesn’t look like it was built for two people. Will it 
hold both of us? Will we be too heavy together?” 

Dumbledore chuckled. 

“Voldemort will not have cared about the weight, but 
about the amount of magical power that crossed his 
lake. I rather think an enchantment will have been 



Page | 634 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




placed upon this boat so that only one wizard at a 
time will be able to sail in it.” 



“But then — ?” 

“I do not think you will count, Harry: You are 
underage and unqualified. Voldemort would never 
have expected a sixteen-year-old to reach this place: I 
think it unlikely that your powers will register 
compared to mine.” 

These words did nothing to raise Harry’s morale; 
perhaps Dumbledore knew it, for he added, 
“Voldemort’s mistake, Harry, Voldemort’s mistake ... 
Age is foolish and forgetful when it underestimates 
youth. ... Now, you first this time, and be careful not 
to touch the water.” 

Dumbledore stood aside and Harry climbed carefully 
into the boat. Dumbledore stepped in too, coiling the 
chain onto the floor. They were crammed in together; 
Harry could not comfortably sit, but crouched, his 
knees jutting over the edge of the boat, which began 
to move at once. There was no sound other than the 
silken rustle of the boat’s prow cleaving the water; it 
moved without their help, as though an invisible rope 
was pulling it onward toward the light in the center. 
Soon they could no longer see the walls of the cavern; 
they might have been at sea except that there were no 
waves. 

Harry looked down and saw the reflected gold of his 
wandlight sparkling and glittering on the black water 
as they passed. The boat was carving deep ripples 
upon the glassy surface, grooves in the dark mirror. 



And then Harry saw it, marble white, floating inches 
below the surface. 

Page | 635 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Professor!” he said, and his startled voice echoed 
loudly over the silent water. 



“Harry?” 

“I think I saw a hand in the water — a human hand!” 

“Yes, I am sure you did,” said Dumbledore calmly. 

Harry stared down into the water, looking for the 
vanished hand, and a sick feeling rose in his throat. 

“So that thing that jumped out of the water — ?” 

But Harry had his answer before Dumbledore could 
reply; the wandlight had slid over a fresh patch of 
water and showed him, this time, a dead man lying 
faceup inches beneath the surface, his open eyes 
misted as though with cobwebs, his hair and his 
robes swirling around him like smoke. 

“There are bodies in here!” said Harry, and his voice 
sounded much higher than usual and most unlike his 
own. 

“Yes,” said Dumbledore placidly, “but we do not need 
to worry about them at the moment.” 

“At the moment?” Harry repeated, tearing his gaze 
from the water to look at Dumbledore. 

“Not while they are merely drifting peacefully below 
us,” said Dumbledore. “There is nothing to be feared 
from a body, Harry, any more than there is anything 
to be feared from the darkness. Lord Voldemort, who 
of course secretly fears both, disagrees. But once 
again he reveals his own lack of wisdom. It is the 
unknown we fear when we look upon death and 
darkness, nothing more.” 

Page | 636 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry said nothing; he did not want to argue, but he 
found the idea that there were bodies floating around 
them and beneath them horrible and, what was more, 
he did not believe that they were not dangerous. 

“But one of them jumped,” he said, trying to make his 
voice as level and calm as Dumbledore ’s. “When I 
tried to Summon the Horcrux, a body leapt out of the 
lake.” 

“Yes,” said Dumbledore. “I am sure that once we take 
the Horcrux, we shall find them less peaceable. 
However, like many creatures that dwell in cold and 
darkness, they fear light and warmth, which we shall 
therefore call to our aid should the need arise. Fire, 
Harry,” Dumbledore added with a smile, in response 
to Harry’s bewildered expression. 

“Oh ... right ...” said Harry quickly. He turned his 
head to look at the greenish glow toward which the 
boat was still inexorably sailing. He could not pretend 
now that he was not scared. The great black lake, 
teeming with the dead ... It seemed hours and hours 
ago that he had met Professor Trelawney, that he had 
given Ron and Hermione Felix Felicis. ... He suddenly 
wished he had said a better good-bye to them . . . and 
he hadn’t seen Ginny at all. ... 

“Nearly there,” said Dumbledore cheerfully. 

Sure enough, the greenish light seemed to be growing 
larger at last, and within minutes, the boat had come 
to a halt, bumping gently into something that Harry 
could not see at first, but when he raised his 
illuminated wand he saw that they had reached a 
small island of smooth rock in the center of the lake. 



“Careful not to touch the water,” said Dumbledore 
again as Harry climbed out of the boat. 

Page | 637 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




The island was no larger than Dumbledore ’s office, an 
expanse of flat dark stone on which stood nothing but 
the source of that greenish light, which looked much 
brighter when viewed close to. Harry squinted at it; at 
first, he thought it was a lamp of some kind, but then 
he saw that the light was coming from a stone basin 
rather like the Pensieve, which was set on top of a 
pedestal. 

Dumbledore approached the basin and Harry 
followed. Side by side, they looked down into it. The 
basin was full of an emerald liquid emitting that 
phosphorescent glow. 

“What is it?” asked Harry quietly. 

“I am not sure,” said Dumbledore. “Something more 
worrisome than blood and bodies, however.” 

Dumbledore pushed back the sleeve of his robe over 
his blackened hand, and stretched out the tips of his 
burned fingers toward the surface of the potion. 

“Sir, no, don’t touch — !” 

“I cannot touch,” said Dumbledore, smiling faintly. 
“See? I cannot approach any nearer than this. You 
try.” 

Staring, Harry put his hand into the basin and 
attempted to touch the potion. He met an invisible 
barrier that prevented him coming within an inch of 
it. No matter how hard he pushed, his fingers 
encountered nothing but what seemed to be solid and 
inflexible air. 

“Out of the way, please, Harry,” said Dumbledore. He 
raised his wand and made complicated movements 
over the surface of the potion, murmuring 

Page | 638 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




soundlessly. Nothing happened, except perhaps that 
the potion glowed a little brighter. Harry remained 
silent while Dumbledore worked, but after a while 
Dumbledore withdrew his wand, and Harry felt it was 
safe to talk again. 

“You think the Horcrux is in there, sir?” 

“Oh yes.” Dumbledore peered more closely into the 
basin. Harry saw his face reflected, upside down, in 
the smooth surface of the green potion. “But how to 
reach it? This potion cannot be penetrated by hand, 
Vanished, parted, scooped up, or siphoned away, nor 
can it be Transfigured, Charmed, or otherwise made 
to change its nature.” 

Almost absentmindedly, Dumbledore raised his wand 
again, twirled it once in midair, and then caught the 
crystal goblet that he had conjured out of nowhere. 

“I can only conclude that this potion is supposed to 
be drunk.” 

“What?” said Harry. “No!” 

“Yes, I think so: Only by drinking it can I empty the 
basin and see what lies in its depths.” 

“But what if — what if it kills you?” 

“Oh, I doubt that it would work like that,” said 
Dumbledore easily. “Lord Voldemort would not want 
to kill the person who reached this island.” 

Harry couldn’t believe it. Was this more of 
Dumbledore ’s insane determination to see good in 
everyone? 



Page | 639 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Sir,” said Harry, trying to keep his voice reasonable, 
“sir, this is Voldemort we’re — ” 

“I’m sorry, Harry; I should have said, he would not 
want to immediately kill the person who reached this 
island,” Dumbledore corrected himself. “He would 
want to keep them alive long enough to find out how 
they managed to penetrate so far through his 
defenses and, most importantly of all, why they were 
so intent upon emptying the basin. Do not forget that 
Lord Voldemort believes that he alone knows about 
his Horcruxes.” 

Harry made to speak again, but this time Dumbledore 
raised his hand for silence, frowning slightly at the 
emerald liquid, evidently thinking hard. 

“Undoubtedly,” he said, finally, “this potion must act 
in a way that will prevent me taking the Horcrux. It 
might paralyze me, cause me to forget what I am here 
for, create so much pain I am distracted, or render me 
incapable in some other way. This being the case, 
Harry, it will be your job to make sure I keep 
drinking, even if you have to tip the potion into my 
protesting mouth. You understand?” 

Their eyes met over the basin, each pale face lit with 
that strange, green light. Harry did not speak. Was 
this why he had been invited along — so that he 
could force-feed Dumbledore a potion that might 
cause him unendurable pain? 

“You remember,” said Dumbledore, “the condition on 
which I brought you with me?” 

Harry hesitated, looking into the blue eyes that had 
turned green in the reflected light of the basin. 

“But what if — ?” 

Page | 640 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You swore, did you not, to follow any command I 
gave you?” 

“Yes, but — ” 

“I warned you, did I not, that there might be danger?” 
“Yes,” said Harry, “but — ” 

“Well, then,” said Dumbledore, shaking back his 
sleeves once more and raising the empty goblet, “you 
have my orders.” 

“Why can’t I drink the potion instead?” asked Harry 
desperately. 

“Because I am much older, much cleverer, and much 
less valuable,” said Dumbledore. “Once and for all, 
Harry, do I have your word that you will do all in your 
power to make me keep drinking?” 

“Couldn’t — ?” 

“Do I have it?” 

“But — ” 

“ Your word, Harry.” 

“I — all right, but — ” 

Before Harry could make any further protest, 
Dumbledore lowered the crystal goblet into the 
potion. For a split second, Harry hoped that he would 
not be able to touch the potion with the goblet, but 
the crystal sank into the surface as nothing else had; 
when the glass was full to the brim, Dumbledore lifted 
it to his mouth. 



Page | 641 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Your good health, Harry.” 

And he drained the goblet. Harry watched, terrified, 
his hands gripping the rim of the basin so hard that 
his fingertips were numb. 

“Professor?” he said anxiously, as Dumbledore 
lowered the empty glass. “How do you feel?” 

Dumbledore shook his head, his eyes closed. Harry 
wondered whether he was in pain. Dumbledore 
plunged the glass blindly back into the basin, refilled 
it, and drank once more. 

In silence, Dumbledore drank three gobletsful of the 
potion. Then, halfway through the fourth goblet, he 
staggered and fell forward against the basin. His eyes 
were still closed, his breathing heavy. 

“Professor Dumbledore?” said Harry, his voice 
strained. “Can you hear me?” 

Dumbledore did not answer. His face was twitching 
as though he was deeply asleep, but dreaming a 
horrible dream. His grip on the goblet was slackening; 
the potion was about to spill from it. Harry reached 
forward and grasped the crystal cup, holding it 
steady. 

“Professor, can you hear me?” he repeated loudly, his 
voice echoing around the cavern. 

Dumbledore panted and then spoke in a voice Harry 
did not recognize, for he had never heard Dumbledore 
frightened like this. 

“I don’t want ... Don’t make me ...” 



Page | 642 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry stared into the whitened face he knew so well, 
at the crooked nose and half-moon spectacles, and 
did not know what to do. 

"... don’t like ... want to stop ...” moaned Dumbledore. 

“You ... you can’t stop, Professor,” said Harry. “You’ve 
got to keep drinking, remember? You told me you had 
to keep drinking. Here ...” 

Hating himself, repulsed by what he was doing, Harry 
forced the goblet back toward Dumbledore ’s mouth 
and tipped it, so that Dumbledore drank the 
remainder of the potion inside. 

“No ...” he groaned, as Harry lowered the goblet back 
into the basin and refilled it for him. “I don’t want to. 
...I don’t want to. ... Let me go. ...” 

“It’s all right, Professor,” said Harry, his hand 
shaking. “It’s all right, I’m here — ” 

“Make it stop, make it stop,” moaned Dumbledore. 

“Yes ... yes, this’ll make it stop,” lied Harry. He tipped 
the contents of the goblet into Dumbledore ’s open 
mouth. 

Dumbledore screamed; the noise echoed all around 
the vast chamber, across the dead black water. 

“No, no, no, no, I can’t, I can’t, don’t make me, I don’t 
want to. ...” 

“It’s all right, Professor, it’s all right!” said Harry 
loudly, his hands shaking so badly he could hardly 
scoop up the sixth gobletful of potion; the basin was 
now half empty. “Nothing’s happening to you, you’re 



Page | 643 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




safe, it isn’t real, I swear it isn’t real — take this, now, 
take this. ...” 

And obediently, Dumbledore drank, as though it was 
an antidote Harry offered him, but upon draining the 
goblet, he sank to his knees, shaking uncontrollably. 

“It’s all my fault, all my fault,” he sobbed. “Please 
make it stop, I know I did wrong, oh please make it 
stop and I’ll never, never again ...” 

“This will make it stop, Professor,” Harry said, his 
voice cracking as he tipped the seventh glass of 
potion into Dumbledore’s mouth. 

Dumbledore began to cower as though invisible 
torturers surrounded him; his flailing hand almost 
knocked the refilled goblet from Harry’s trembling 
hands as he moaned, “Don’t hurt them, don’t hurt 
them, please, please, it’s my fault, hurt me instead ...” 

“Here, drink this, drink this, you’ll be all right,” said 
Harry desperately, and once again Dumbledore 
obeyed him, opening his mouth even as he kept his 
eyes tight shut and shook from head to foot. 

And now he fell forward, screaming again, hammering 
his fists upon the ground, while Harry filled the ninth 
goblet. 

“Please, please, please, no ... not that, not that, I’ll do 
anything ...” 

“Just drink, Professor, just drink ...” 

Dumbledore drank like a child dying of thirst, but 
when he had finished, he yelled again as though his 
insides were on fire. “No more, please, no more ...” 



Page | 644 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry scooped up a tenth gobletful of potion and felt 
the crystal scrape the bottom of the basin. 



“We’re nearly there, Professor. Drink this, drink it. ...” 

He supported Dumbledore’s shoulders and again, 
Dumbledore drained the glass; then Harry was on his 
feet once more, refilling the goblet as Dumbledore 
began to scream in more anguish than ever, “I want 
to die! I want to die! Make it stop, make it stop, I want 
to die!” 

“Drink this, Professor. Drink this. ...” 

Dumbledore drank, and no sooner had he finished 
than he yelled, “KILL ME!” 

“This — this one will!” gasped Harry. “Just drink this 
... It’ll be over ... all over!” 

Dumbledore gulped at the goblet, drained every last 
drop, and then, with a great, rattling gasp, rolled over 
onto his face. 

“No!” shouted Harry, who had stood to refill the goblet 
again; instead he dropped the cup into the basin, 
flung himself down beside Dumbledore, and heaved 
him over onto his back; Dumbledore’s glasses were 
askew, his mouth agape, his eyes closed. “No,” said 
Harry, shaking Dumbledore, “no, you’re not dead, you 
said it wasn’t poison, wake up, wake up — 
Rennervatel” he cried, his wand pointing at 
Dumbledore’s chest; there was a flash of red light but 
nothing happened. “Renneruate — sir — please — ” 

Dumbledore’s eyelids flickered; Harry’s heart leapt. 

“Sir, are you — ?” 

Page | 645 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Water,” croaked Dumbledore. 

“Water,” panted Harry. “Yes — ” 

He leapt to his feet and seized the goblet he had 
dropped in the basin; he barely registered the golden 
locket lying curled beneath it. 

“Aguamenti\” he shouted, jabbing the goblet with his 
wand. 

The goblet filled with clear water; Harry dropped to 
his knees beside Dumbledore, raised his head, and 
brought the glass to his lips — but it was empty. 
Dumbledore groaned and began to pant. 

“But I had some — wait — AguamentiV’ said Harry 
again, pointing his wand at the goblet. Once more, for 
a second, clear water gleamed within it, but as he 
approached Dumbledore ’s mouth, the water vanished 
again. 

“Sir, I’m trying, I’m trying!” said Harry desperately, 
but he did not think that Dumbledore could hear 
him; he had rolled onto his side and was drawing 
great, rattling breaths that sounded agonizing. 
“Aguamenti — Aguamenti — A GUAMENTP. ” 

The goblet filled and emptied once more. And now 
Dumbledore ’s breathing was fading. His brain 
whirling in panic, Harry knew, instinctively, the only 
way left to get water, because Voldemort had planned 
it so ... 

He flung himself over to the edge of the rock and 
plunged the goblet into the lake, bringing it up full to 
the brim of icy water that did not vanish. 



Page | 646 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Sir — here!” Harry yelled, and lunging forward, he 
tipped the water clumsily over Dumbledore’s face. 

It was the best he could do, for the icy feeling on his 
arm not holding the cup was not the lingering chill of 
the water. A slimy white hand had gripped his wrist, 
and the creature to whom it belonged was pulling 
him, slowly, backward across the rock. The surface of 
the lake was no longer mirror-smooth; it was 
churning, and everywhere Harry looked, white heads 
and hands were emerging from the dark water, men 
and women and children with sunken, sightless eyes 
were moving toward the rock: an army of the dead 
rising from the black water. 

“Petrificus Totalusl” yelled Harry, struggling to cling to 
the smooth, soaked surface of the island as he 
pointed his wand at the Inferius that had his arm: It 
released him, falling backward into the water with a 
splash; he scrambled to his feet, but many more Inferi 
were already climbing onto the rock, their bony hands 
clawing at its slippery surface, their blank, frosted 
eyes upon him, trailing waterlogged rags, sunken 
faces leering. 

“Petrificus Totalusl” Harry bellowed again, backing 
away as he swiped his wand through the air; six or 
seven of them crumpled, but more were coming 
toward him. “Impedimental Incarcerousl ” 

A few of them stumbled, one or two of them bound in 
ropes, but those climbing onto the rock behind them 
merely stepped over or on the fallen bodies. Still 
slashing at the air with his wand, Harry yelled, 

“ Sectumsempral SECTUMSEMPRAl” 

But though gashes appeared in their sodden rags and 
their icy skin, they had no blood to spill: They walked 
on, unfeeling, their shrunken hands outstretched 

Page | 647 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




toward him, and as he backed away still farther, he 
felt arms enclose him from behind, thin, fleshless 
arms cold as death, and his feet left the ground as 
they lifted him and began to carry him, slowly and 
surely, back to the water, and he knew there would 
be no release, that he would be drowned, and become 
one more dead guardian of a fragment of Voldemort’s 
shattered soul. ... 

But then, through the darkness, fire erupted: crimson 
and gold, a ring of fire that surrounded the rock so 
that the Inferi holding Harry so tightly stumbled and 
faltered; they did not dare pass through the flames to 
get to the water. They dropped Harry; he hit the 
ground, slipped on the rock, and fell, grazing his 
arms, but scrambled back up, raising his wand and 
staring around. 

Dumbledore was on his feet again, pale as any of the 
surrounding Inferi, but taller than any too, the fire 
dancing in his eyes; his wand was raised like a torch 
and from its tip emanated the flames, like a vast 
lasso, encircling them all with warmth. 

The Inferi bumped into each other, attempting, 
blindly, to escape the fire in which they were 
enclosed. ... 

Dumbledore scooped the locket from the bottom of 
the stone basin and stowed it inside his robes. 
Wordlessly, he gestured to Harry to come to his side. 
Distracted by the flames, the Inferi seemed unaware 
that their quarry was leaving as Dumbledore led 
Harry back to the boat, the ring of fire moving with 
them, around them, the bewildered Inferi 
accompanying them to the water’s edge, where they 
slipped gratefully back into their dark waters. 



Page | 648 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry, who was shaking all over, thought for a 
moment that Dumbledore might not be able to climb 
into the boat; he staggered a little as he attempted it; 
all his efforts seemed to be going into maintaining the 
ring of protective flame around them. Harry seized 
him and helped him back to his seat. Once they were 
both safely jammed inside again, the boat began to 
move back across the black water, away from the 
rock, still encircled by that ring of fire, and it seemed 
that the Inferi swarming below them did not dare 
resurface. 

“Sir,” panted Harry, “sir, I forgot — about fire — they 
were coming at me and I panicked — ” 

“Quite understandable,” murmured Dumbledore. 
Harry was alarmed to hear how faint his voice was. 

They reached the bank with a little bump and Harry 
leapt out, then turned quickly to help Dumbledore. 
The moment that Dumbledore reached the bank he 
let his wand hand fall; the ring of fire vanished, but 
the Inferi did not emerge again from the water. The 
little boat sank into the water once more; clanking 
and tinkling, its chain slithered back into the lake 
too. Dumbledore gave a great sigh and leaned against 
the cavern wall. 

“I am weak. ...” he said. 

“Don’t worry, sir,” said Harry at once, anxious about 
Dumbledore ’s extreme pallor and by his air of 
exhaustion. “Don’t worry, I’ll get us back. ... Lean on 
me, sir. ...” 

And pulling Dumbledore ’s uninjured arm around his 
shoulders, Harry guided his headmaster back around 
the lake, bearing most of his weight. 



Page | 649 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“The protection was ... after all ... well-designed,” said 
Dumbledore faintly. “One alone could not have done 
it. ... You did well, very well, Harry. ...” 

“Don’t talk now,” said Harry, fearing how slurred 
Dumbledore’s voice had become, how much his feet 
dragged. “Save your energy, sir. ... We’ll soon be out 
of here. ...” 

“The archway will have sealed again. ... My knife ...” 

“There’s no need, I got cut on the rock,” said Harry 
firmly. “Just tell me where. ...” 

“Here ...” 

Harry wiped his grazed forearm upon the stone: 
Having received its tribute of blood, the archway 
reopened instantly. They crossed the outer cave, and 
Harry helped Dumbledore back into the icy seawater 
that filled the crevice in the cliff. 

“It’s going to be all right, sir,” Harry said over and 
over again, more worried by Dumbledore’s silence 
than he had been by his weakened voice. “We’re 
nearly there. ... I can Apparate us both back. ... Don’t 
worry. ...” 

“I am not worried, Harry,” said Dumbledore, his voice 
a little stronger despite the freezing water. “I am with 
you.” 



Page | 650 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






THE LIGHTNING-STRUCK TOWER 

Once back under the starry sky, Harry heaved 
Dumbledore onto the top of the nearest boulder and 
then to his feet. Sodden and shivering, Dumbledore’s 
weight still upon him, Harry concentrated harder 
than he had ever done upon his destination: 
Hogsmeade. Closing his eyes, gripping Dumbledore’s 
arm as tightly as he could, he stepped forward into 
that feeling of horrible compression. 

He knew it had worked before he opened his eyes: The 
smell of salt, the sea breeze had gone. He and 
Dumbledore were shivering and dripping in the 
middle of the dark High Street in Hogsmeade. For one 
horrible moment Harry’s imagination showed him 
more Inferi creeping toward him around the sides of 
shops, but he blinked and saw that nothing was 
stirring; all was still, the darkness complete but for a 
few streetlamps and lit upper windows. 



Page | 651 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



“We did it, Professor!” Harry whispered with difficulty; 
he suddenly realized that he had a searing stitch in 
his chest. “We did it! We got the Horcrux!” 

Dumbledore staggered against him. For a moment, 
Harry thought that his inexpert Apparition had 
thrown Dumbledore off balance; then he saw his face, 
paler and damper than ever in the distant light of a 
streetlamp. 

“Sir, are you all right?” 

“I’ve been better,” said Dumbledore weakly, though 
the corners of his mouth twitched. “That potion ... 
was no health drink. ...” 

And to Harry’s horror, Dumbledore sank onto the 
ground. 

“Sir — it’s okay, sir, you’re going to be all right, don’t 
worry — ” 

He looked around desperately for help, but there was 
nobody to be seen and all he could think was that he 
must somehow get Dumbledore quickly to the 
hospital wing. 

“We need to get you up to the school, sir. ... Madam 
Pomfrey ...” 

“No,” said Dumbledore. “It is ... Professor Snape 
whom I need. ... But I do not think ... I can walk very 
far just yet. ...” 

“Right — sir, listen — I’m going to knock on a door, 
find a place you can stay — then I can run and get 
Madam — ” 



Page | 652 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Severus,” said Dumbledore clearly. “I need Severus. 



“All right then, Snape — but I’m going to have to leave 
you for a moment so I can — ” 

Before Harry could make a move, however, he heard 
running footsteps. His heart leapt: Somebody had 
seen, somebody knew they needed help — and 
looking around he saw Madam Rosmerta scurrying 
down the dark street toward them on high-heeled, 
fluffy slippers, wearing a silk dressing gown 
embroidered with dragons. 

“I saw you Apparate as I was pulling my bedroom 
curtains! Thank goodness, thank goodness, I couldn’t 
think what to — but what’s wrong with Albus?” 

She came to a halt, panting, and stared down, wide- 
eyed, at Dumbledore. 

“He’s hurt,” said Harry. “Madam Rosmerta, can he 
come into the Three Broomsticks while I go up to the 
school and get help for him?” 

“You can’t go up there alone! Don’t you realize — 
haven’t you seen — ? 

“If you help me support him,” said Harry, not 
listening to her, “I think we can get him inside — ” 

“What has happened?” asked Dumbledore. 

“Rosmerta, what’s wrong?” 

“The — the Dark Mark, Albus.” 

And she pointed into the sky, in the direction of 
Hogwarts. Dread flooded Harry at the sound of the 
words. ... He turned and looked. 

Page | 653 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




There it was, hanging in the sky above the school: the 
blazing green skull with a serpent tongue, the mark 
Death Eaters left behind whenever they had entered a 
building ... wherever they had murdered. ... 

“When did it appear?” asked Dumbledore, and his 
hand clenched painfully upon Harry’s shoulder as he 
struggled to his feet. 

“Must have been minutes ago, it wasn’t there when I 
put the cat out, but when I got upstairs — ” 

“We need to return to the castle at once,” said 
Dumbledore. “Rosmerta” — and though he staggered 
a little, he seemed wholly in command of the situation 
— “we need transport — brooms — ” 

“I’ve got a couple behind the bar,” she said, looking 
very frightened. “Shall I run and fetch — ?” 

“No, Harry can do it.” 

Harry raised his wand at once. 

“Accio Rosmerta’s Broomsl” 

A second later they heard a loud bang as the front 
door of the pub burst open; two brooms had shot out 
into the street and were racing each other to Harry’s 
side, where they stopped dead, quivering slightly at 
waist height. 

“Rosmerta, please send a message to the Ministry,” 
said Dumbledore, as he mounted the broom nearest 
him. “It might be that nobody within Hogwarts has 
yet realized anything is wrong. . . . Harry, put on your 
Invisibility Cloak.” 



Page | 654 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry pulled his Cloak out of his pocket and threw it 
over himself before mounting his broom: Madam 
Rosmerta was already tottering back toward her pub 
as Harry and Dumbledore kicked off from the ground 
and rose up into the air. As they sped toward the 
castle, Harry glanced sideways at Dumbledore, ready 
to grab him should he fall, but the sight of the Dark 
Mark seemed to have acted upon Dumbledore like a 
stimulant: He was bent low over his broom, his eyes 
fixed upon the Mark, his long silver hair and beard 
flying behind him on the night air. And Harry too 
looked ahead at the skull, and fear swelled inside him 
like a venomous bubble, compressing his lungs, 
driving all other discomfort from his mind. ... 

How long had they been away? Had Ron, Hermione, 
and Ginny’s luck run out by now? Was it one of them 
who had caused the Mark to be set over the school, or 
was it Neville, or Luna, or some other member of the 
D.A.? And if it was ... he was the one who had told 
them to patrol the corridors, he had asked them to 
leave the safety of their beds. ... Would he be 
responsible, again, for the death of a friend? 

As they flew over the dark, twisting lane down which 
they had walked earlier, Harry heard, over the 
whistling of the night air in his ears, Dumbledore 
muttering in some strange language again. He 
thought he understood why as he felt his broom 
shudder when they flew over the boundary wall into 
the grounds: Dumbledore was undoing the 
enchantments he himself had set around the castle 
so they could enter at speed. The Dark Mark was 
glittering directly above the Astronomy Tower, the 
highest of the castle. Did that mean the death had 
occurred there? 



Page | 655 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore had already crossed the crenellated 
ramparts and was dismounting; Harry landed next to 
him seconds later and looked around. 

The ramparts were deserted. The door to the spiral 
staircase that led back into the castle was closed. 
There was no sign of a struggle, of a fight to the 
death, of a body. 

“What does it mean?” Harry asked Dumbledore, 
looking up at the green skull with its serpent’s tongue 
glinting evilly above them. “Is it the real Mark? Has 
someone definitely been — Professor?” 

In the dim green glow from the Mark, Harry saw 
Dumbledore clutching at his chest with his blackened 
hand. 

“Go and wake Severus,” said Dumbledore faintly but 
clearly. “Tell him what has happened and bring him 
to me. Do nothing else, speak to nobody else, and do 
not remove your cloak. I shall wait here.” 

“But — ” 

“You swore to obey me, Harry — go!” 

Harry hurried over to the door leading to the spiral 
staircase, but his hand had only just closed upon the 
iron ring of the door when he heard running footsteps 
on the other side. He looked around at Dumbledore, 
who gestured him to retreat. Harry backed away, 
drawing his wand as he did so. 

The door burst open and somebody erupted through 
it and shouted, “Expelliarmus\” 

Harry’s body became instantly rigid and immobile, 
and he felt himself fall back against the tower wall, 

Page | 656 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




propped like an unsteady statue, unable to move or 
speak. He could not understand how it had happened 
— Expelliarmus was not a Freezing Charm — 

Then, by the light of the Mark, he saw Dumbledore ’s 
wand flying in an arc over the edge of the ramparts 
and understood. ... Dumbledore had wordlessly 
immobilized Harry, and the second he had taken to 
perform the spell had cost him the chance of 
defending himself. 

Standing against the ramparts, very white in the face, 
Dumbledore still showed no sign of panic or distress. 
He merely looked across at his disarmer and said, 
“Good evening, Draco.” 

Malfoy stepped forward, glancing around quickly to 
check that he and Dumbledore were alone. His eyes 
fell upon the second broom. 

“Who else is here?” 

“A question I might ask you. Or are you acting alone?” 

Harry saw Malfoy’s pale eyes shift back to 
Dumbledore in the greenish glare of the Mark. 

“No,” he said. “I’ve got backup. There are Death 
Eaters here in your school tonight.” 

“Well, well,” said Dumbledore, as though Malfoy was 
showing him an ambitious homework project. “Very 
good indeed. You found a way to let them in, did 
you?” 

“Yeah,” said Malfoy, who was panting. “Right under 
your nose and you never realized!” 



Page | 657 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Ingenious,” said Dumbledore. “Yet ... forgive me ... 
where are they now? You seem unsupported.” 

“They met some of your guards. They’re having a fight 
down below. They won’t be long. ... I came on ahead. I 
— I’ve got a job to do.” 

“Well, then, you must get on and do it, my dear boy,” 
said Dumbledore softly. 

There was silence. Harry stood imprisoned within his 
own invisible, paralyzed body, staring at the two of 
them, his ears straining to hear sounds of the Death 
Eaters’ distant fight, and in front of him, Draco 
Malfoy did nothing but stare at Albus Dumbledore, 
who, incredibly, smiled. 

“Draco, Draco, you are not a killer.” 

“How do you know?” said Malfoy at once. 

He seemed to realize how childish the words had 
sounded; Harry saw him flush in the Mark’s greenish 
light. 

“You don’t know what I’m capable of,” said Malfoy 
more forcefully. “You don’t know what I’ve done!” 

“Oh yes, I do,” said Dumbledore mildly. “You almost 
killed Katie Bell and Ronald Weasley. You have been 
trying, with increasing desperation, to kill me all year. 
Forgive me, Draco, but they have been feeble 
attempts. ... So feeble, to be honest, that I wonder 
whether your heart has been really in it.” 

“It has been in it!” said Malfoy vehemently. “I’ve been 
working on it all year, and tonight — ” 



Page | 658 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Somewhere in the depths of the castle below Harry 
heard a muffled yell. Malfoy stiffened and glanced 
over his shoulder. 

“Somebody is putting up a good fight,” said 
Dumbledore conversationally. “But you were saying ... 
yes, you have managed to introduce Death Eaters 
into my school, which, I admit, I thought impossible. 

. . . How did you do it?” 

But Malfoy said nothing: He was still listening to 
whatever was happening below and seemed almost as 
paralyzed as Harry was. 

“Perhaps you ought to get on with the job alone,” 
suggested Dumbledore. “What if your backup has 
been thwarted by my guard? As you have perhaps 
realized, there are members of the Order of the 
Phoenix here tonight too. And after all, you don’t 
really need help. ... I have no wand at the moment. ... 

I cannot defend myself.” 

Malfoy merely stared at him. 

“I see,” said Dumbledore kindly, when Malfoy neither 
moved nor spoke. “You are afraid to act until they join 
you.” 

“I’m not afraid!” snarled Malfoy, though he still made 
no move to hurt Dumbledore. “It’s you who should be 
scared!” 

“But why? I don’t think you will kill me, Draco. Killing 
is not nearly as easy as the innocent believe. ... So tell 
me, while we wait for your friends ... how did you 
smuggle them in here? It seems to have taken you a 
long time to work out how to do it.” 



Page | 659 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Malfoy looked as though he was fighting down the 
urge to shout, or to vomit. He gulped and took several 
deep breaths, glaring at Dumbledore, his wand 
pointing directly at the latter’s heart. Then, as though 
he could not help himself, he said, “I had to mend 
that broken Vanishing Cabinet that no one’s used for 
years. The one Montague got lost in last year.” 

“Aaaah.” Dumbledore’s sigh was half a groan. He 
closed his eyes for a moment. “That was clever. ... 
There is a pair, I take it?” 

“In Borgin and Burkes,” said Malfoy, “and they make 
a kind of passage between them. Montague told me 
that when he was stuck in the Hogwarts one, he was 
trapped in limbo but sometimes he could hear what 
was going on at school, and sometimes what was 
going on in the shop, as if the cabinet was traveling 
between them, but he couldn’t make anyone hear 
him. ... In the end, he managed to Apparate out, even 
though he’d never passed his test. He nearly died 
doing it. Everyone thought it was a really good story, 
but I was the only one who realized what it meant — 
even Borgin didn’t know — I was the one who realized 
there could be a way into Hogwarts through the 
cabinets if I fixed the broken one.” 

“Very good,” murmured Dumbledore. “So the Death 
Eaters were able to pass from Borgin and Burkes into 
the school to help you. ... A clever plan, a very clever 
plan ... and, as you say, right under my nose.” 

“Yeah,” said Malfoy, who bizarrely seemed to draw 
courage and comfort from Dumbledore’s praise. 

“Yeah, it was!” 

“But there were times,” Dumbledore went on, “weren’t 
there, when you were not sure you would succeed in 
mending the cabinet? And you resorted to crude and 

Page | 660 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




badly judged measures such as sending me a cursed 
necklace that was bound to reach the wrong hands . . 
poisoning mead there was only the slightest chance I 
might drink. ...” 

“Yeah, well, you still didn’t realize who was behind 
that stuff, did you?” sneered Malfoy, as Dumbledore 
slid a little down the ramparts, the strength in his 
legs apparently fading, and Harry struggled 
fruitlessly, mutely, against the enchantment binding 
him. 

“As a matter of fact, I did,” said Dumbledore. “I was 
sure it was you. 

“Why didn’t you stop me, then?” Malfoy demanded. 

“I tried, Draco. Professor Snape has been keeping 
watch over you on my orders — ” 

“He hasn’t been doing your orders, he promised my 
mother — ” 

“Of course that is what he would tell you, Draco, but 



“He’s a double agent, you stupid old man, he isn’t 
working for you, you just think he is!” 

“We must agree to differ on that, Draco. It so happens 
that I trust Professor Snape — ” 

“Well, you’re losing your grip, then!” sneered Malfoy. 
“He’s been offering me plenty of help — wanting all 
the glory for himself — wanting a bit of the action — 
What are you doing?’ ‘Did you do the necklace, that 
was stupid, it could have blown everything — ’ But I 
haven’t told him what I’ve been doing in the Room of 
Requirement, he’s going to wake up tomorrow and it’ll 
Page | 661 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




all be over and he won’t be the Dark Lord’s favorite 
anymore, he’ll be nothing compared to me, nothing!” 



“Very gratifying,” said Dumbledore mildly. “We all like 
appreciation for our own hard work, of course. But 
you must have had an accomplice, all the same ... 
someone in Hogsmeade, someone who was able to 
slip Katie the — the — aaaah ...” 

Dumbledore closed his eyes again and nodded, as 
though he was about to fall asleep. "... of course ... 
Rosmerta. How long has she been under the Imperius 
Curse?” 

“Got there at last, have you?” Malfoy taunted. 

There was another yell from below, rather louder than 
the last. Malfoy looked nervously over his shoulder 
again, then back at Dumbledore, who went on: “So 
poor Rosmerta was forced to lurk in her own 
bathroom and pass that necklace to any Hogwarts 
student who entered the room unaccompanied? And 
the poisoned mead ... well, naturally, Rosmerta was 
able to poison it for you before she sent the bottle to 
Slughorn, believing that it was to be my Christmas 
present. ... Yes, very neat ... very neat ... Poor Mr. 
Filch would not, of course, think to check a bottle of 
Rosmerta’s. Tell me, how have you been 
communicating with Rosmerta? I thought we had all 
methods of communication in and out of the school 
monitored.” 

“Enchanted coins,” said Malfoy, as though he was 
compelled to keep talking, though his wand hand was 
shaking badly. “I had one and she had the other and I 
could send her messages — ” 

“Isn’t that the secret method of communication the 
group that called themselves Dumbledore ’s Army 

Page | 662 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




used last year?” asked Dumbledore. His voice was 
light and conversational, but Harry saw him slip an 
inch lower down the wall as he said it. 

“Yeah, I got the idea from them,” said Malfoy, with a 
twisted smile. “I got the idea of poisoning the mead 
from the Mudblood Granger as well, I heard her 
talking in the library about Filch not recognizing 
potions.” 

“Please do not use that offensive word in front of me,” 
said Dumbledore. 

Malfoy gave a harsh laugh. “You care about me saying 
‘Mudblood’ when I’m about to kill you?” 

“Yes, I do,” said Dumbledore, and Harry saw his feet 
slide a little on the floor as he struggled to remain 
upright. “But as for being about to kill me, Draco, you 
have had several long minutes now, we are quite 
alone, I am more defenseless than you can have 
dreamed of finding me, and still you have not acted. 



Malfoy’s mouth contorted involuntarily, as though he 
had tasted something very bitter. 

“Now, about tonight,” Dumbledore went on, “I am a 
little puzzled about how it happened. ... You knew 
that I had left the school? But of course,” he 
answered his own question, “Rosmerta saw me 
leaving, she tipped you off using your ingenious 
coins, I’m sure.” 

“That’s right,” said Malfoy. “But she said you were 
just going for a drink, you’d be back. ...” 



Page | 663 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, I certainly did have a drink ... and I came back 
... after a fashion,” mumbled Dumbledore. “So you 
decided to spring a trap for me?” 

“We decided to put the Dark Mark over the tower and 
get you to hurry up here, to see who’d been killed,” 
said Malfoy. “And it worked!” 

“Well ... yes and no ...” said Dumbledore. “But am I to 
take it, then, that nobody has been murdered?” 

“Someone’s dead,” said Malfoy, and his voice seemed 
to go up an octave as he said it. “One of your people 
...I don’t know who, it was dark. ... I stepped over the 
body. ... I was supposed to be waiting up here when 
you got back, only your Phoenix lot got in the way. ...” 

“Yes, they do that,” said Dumbledore. 

There was a bang and shouts from below, louder than 
ever; it sounded as though people were fighting on the 
actual spiral staircase that led to where Dumbledore, 
Malfoy, and Harry stood, and Harry’s heart thundered 
unheard in his invisible chest. ... Someone was dead. 

. . . Malfoy had stepped over the body . . . but who was 
it? 



“There is little time, one way or another,” said 
Dumbledore. “So let us discuss your options, Draco.” 

“My options!” said Malfoy loudly. “I’m standing here 
with a wand — I’m about to kill you — ” 

“My dear boy, let us have no more pretense about 
that. If you were going to kill me, you would have 
done it when you first disarmed me, you would not 
have stopped for this pleasant chat about ways and 
means.” 



Page | 664 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I haven’t got any options!” said Malfoy, and he was 
suddenly white as Dumbledore. “I’ve got to do it! He’ll 
kill me! He’ll kill my whole family!” 

“I appreciate the difficulty of your position,” said 
Dumbledore. “Why else do you think I have not 
confronted you before now? Because I knew that you 
would have been murdered if Lord Voldemort realized 
that I suspected you.” 

Malfoy winced at the sound of the name. 

“I did not dare speak to you of the mission with which 
I knew you had been entrusted, in case he used 
Legilimency against you,” continued Dumbledore. 

“But now at last we can speak plainly to each other. 

... No harm has been done, you have hurt nobody, 
though you are very lucky that your unintentional 
victims survived. ... I can help you, Draco.” 

“No, you can’t,” said Malfoy, his wand hand shaking 
very badly indeed. “Nobody can. He told me to do it or 
he’ll kill me. I’ve got no choice.” 

“Come over to the right side, Draco, and we can hide 
you more completely than you can possibly imagine. 
What is more, I can send members of the Order to 
your mother tonight to hide her likewise. Your father 
is safe at the moment in Azkaban. ... When the time 
comes, we can protect him too. Come over to the right 
side, Draco ... you are not a killer. ...” 

Malfoy stared at Dumbledore. 

“But I got this far, didn’t I?” he said slowly. “They 
thought I’d die in the attempt, but I’m here ... and 
you’re in my power. ... I’m the one with the wand. ... 
You’re at my mercy. ...” 



Page | 665 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No, Draco,” said Dumbledore quietly. “It is my mercy, 
and not yours, that matters now.” 

Malfoy did not speak. His mouth was open, his wand 
hand still trembling. Harry thought he saw it drop by 
a fraction — 

But suddenly footsteps were thundering up the stairs, 
and a second later Malfoy was buffeted out of the way 
as four people in black robes burst through the door 
onto the ramparts. Still paralyzed, his eyes staring 
unblinkingly, Harry gazed in terror upon four 
strangers: It seemed the Death Eaters had won the 
fight below. 

A lumpy-looking man with an odd lopsided leer gave a 
wheezy giggle. 

“Dumbledore cornered!” he said, and he turned to a 
stocky little woman who looked as though she could 
be his sister and who was grinning eagerly. 
“Dumbledore wandless, Dumbledore alone! Well done, 
Draco, well done!” 

“Good evening, Amycus,” said Dumbledore calmly, as 
though welcoming the man to a tea party. “And you’ve 
brought Alecto too. ... Charming ...” 

The woman gave an angry little titter. “Think your 
little jokes’ll help you on your deathbed then?” she 
jeered. 

“Jokes? No, no, these are manners,” replied 
Dumbledore. 

“Do it,” said the stranger standing nearest to Harry, a 
big, rangy man with matted gray hair and whiskers, 
whose black Death Eater’s robes looked 
uncomfortably tight. He had a voice like none that 

Page | 666 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry had ever heard: a rasping bark of a voice. Harry 
could smell a powerful mixture of dirt, sweat, and, 
unmistakably, of blood coming from him. His filthy 
hands had long yellowish nails. 

“Is that you, Fenrir?” asked Dumbledore. 

“That’s right,” rasped the other. “Pleased to see me, 
Dumbledore?” 

“No, I cannot say that I am.” 

Greyback grinned, showing pointed teeth. Blood 
trickled down his chin and he licked his lips slowly, 
obscenely. 

“But you know how much I like kids, Dumbledore.” 

“Am I to take it that you are attacking even without 
the full moon now? This is most unusual. ... You have 
developed a taste for human flesh that cannot be 
satisfied once a month?” 

“That’s right,” said Fenrir Greyback. “Shocks you 
that, does it, Dumbledore? Frightens you?” 

“Well, I cannot pretend it does not disgust me a little,” 
said Dumbledore. “And, yes, I am a little shocked that 
Draco here invited you, of all people, into the school 
where his friends live. ...” 

“I didn’t,” breathed Malfoy. He was not looking at 
Fenrir; he did not seem to want to even glance at him. 
“I didn’t know he was going to come — ” 

“I wouldn’t want to miss a trip to Hogwarts, 
Dumbledore,” rasped Greyback. “Not when there are 
throats to be ripped out... Delicious, delicious ...” 



Page | 667 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




And he raised a yellow fingernail and picked at his 
front teeth, leering at Dumbledore. “I could do you for 
afters, Dumbledore.” 

“No,” said the fourth Death Eater sharply. He had a 
heavy, brutal-looking face. “We’ve got orders. Draco’s 
got to do it. Now, Draco, and quickly.” 

Malfoy was showing less resolution than ever. He 
looked terrified as he stared into Dumbledore ’s face, 
which was even paler, and rather lower than usual, 
as he had slid so far down the rampart wall. 

“He’s not long for this world anyway, if you ask me!” 
said the lopsided man, to the accompaniment of his 
sister’s wheezing giggles. “Look at him — what’s 
happened to you, then, Dumby?” 

“Oh, weaker resistance, slower reflexes, Amycus,” 
said Dumbledore. “Old age, in short ... One day, 
perhaps, it will happen to you ... if you are lucky. ...” 

“What’s that mean, then, what’s that mean?” yelled 
the Death Eater, suddenly violent. “Always the same, 
weren’t yeh, Dumby, talking and doing nothing, 
nothing. I don’t even know why the Dark Lord’s 
bothering to kill yer! Come on, Draco, do it!” 

But at that moment there were renewed sounds of 
scuffling from below and a voice shouted, “ They’ve 
blocked the stairs — Reductol REDUCTOl” 

Harry’s heart leapt: So these four had not eliminated 
all opposition, but merely broken through the fight to 
the top of the tower, and, by the sound of it, created a 
barrier behind them — 

“Now, Draco, quickly!” said the brutal-faced man 
angrily. 

Page | 668 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




But Malfoy’s hand was shaking so badly that he could 
barely aim. 

“I’ll do it,” snarled Fenrir, moving toward Dumbledore 
with his hands outstretched, his teeth bared. 

“I said no!” shouted the brutal-faced man; there was a 
flash of light and the werewolf was blasted out of the 
way; he hit the ramparts and staggered, looking 
furious. Harry’s heart was hammering so hard it 
seemed impossible that nobody could hear him 
standing there, imprisoned by Dumbledore ’s spell — 
if he could only move, he could aim a curse from 
under the cloak — 

“Draco, do it or stand aside so one of us — ” screeched 
the woman, but at that precise moment, the door to 
the ramparts burst open once more and there stood 
Snape, his wand clutched in his hand as his black 
eyes swept the scene, from Dumbledore slumped 
against the wall, to the four Death Eaters, including 
the enraged werewolf, and Malfoy. 

“We’ve got a problem, Snape,” said the lumpy 
Amycus, whose eyes and wand were fixed alike upon 
Dumbledore, “the boy doesn’t seem able — ” 

But somebody else had spoken Snape’s name, quite 
softly. 

“Severus ...” 

The sound frightened Harry beyond anything he had 
experienced all evening. For the first time, 

Dumbledore was pleading. 

Snape said nothing, but walked forward and pushed 
Malfoy roughly out of the way. The three Death Eaters 



Page | 669 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




fell back without a word. Even the werewolf seemed 
cowed. 

Snape gazed for a moment at Dumbledore, and there 
was revulsion and hatred etched in the harsh lines of 
his face. 

“Severus ... please ...” 

Snape raised his wand and pointed it directly at 
Dumbledore. 

“Avada KedavraV’ 

A jet of green light shot from the end of Snape’s wand 
and hit Dumbledore squarely in the chest. Harry’s 
scream of horror never left him; silent and unmoving, 
he was forced to watch as Dumbledore was blasted 
into the air. For a split second, he seemed to hang 
suspended beneath the shining skull, and then he fell 
slowly backward, like a great rag doll, over the 
battlements and out of sight. 



Page | 670 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






FLIGHT OF THE PRINCE 

Harry felt as though he too were hurtling through 
space; it had not happened. ...It could not have 
happened. ... 

“Out of here, quickly,” said Snape. 

He seized Malfoy by the scruff of the neck and forced 
him through the door ahead of the rest; Greyback and 
the squat brother and sister followed, the latter both 
panting excitedly. As they vanished through the door, 
Harry realized he could move again. What was now 
holding him paralyzed against the wall was not magic, 
but horror and shock. He threw the Invisibility Cloak 
aside as the brutal-faced Death Eater, last to leave 
the tower top, was disappearing through the door. 

“Petrificus Totalusl” 

The Death Eater buckled as though hit in the back 
with something solid and fell to the ground, rigid as a 
waxwork, but he had barely hit the floor when Harry 



Page | 671 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



was clambering over him and running down the 
darkened staircase. 

Terror tore at Harry’s heart. ... He had to get to 
Dumbledore and he had to catch Snape. ... Somehow 
the two things were linked. ... He could reverse what 
had happened if he had them both together. . . . 
Dumbledore could not have died. ... 

He leapt the last ten steps of the spiral staircase and 
stopped where he landed, his wand raised: The dimly 
lit corridor was full of dust; half the ceiling seemed to 
have fallen in; and a battle was raging before him, but 
even as he attempted to make out who was fighting 
whom, he heard the hated voice shout, “It’s over, time 
to go\” and saw Snape disappearing around the corner 
at the far end of the corridor; he and Malfoy seemed 
to have forced their way through the fight unscathed. 
As Harry plunged after them, one of the fighters 
detached themselves from the fray and flew at him: It 
was the werewolf, Fenrir. He was on top of Harry 
before Harry could raise his wand: Harry fell 
backward, with filthy matted hair in his face, the 
stench of sweat and blood filling his nose and mouth, 
hot greedy breath at his throat — 

“Petrificus Totalusl” 

Harry felt Fenrir collapse against him; with a 
stupendous effort he pushed the werewolf off and 
onto the floor as a jet of green light came flying 
toward him; he ducked and ran, headfirst, into the 
fight. His feet met something squashy and slippery on 
the floor and he stumbled: There were two bodies 
lying there, lying facedown in a pool of blood, but 
there was no time to investigate. Harry now saw red 
hair flying like flames in front of him: Ginny was 
locked in combat with the lumpy Death Eater, 
Amycus, who was throwing hex after hex at her while 
Page | 672 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




she dodged them: Amycus was giggling, enjoying the 
sport: “Crucio — Crucio — you can’t dance forever, 
pretty — ” 

“Impedimenta).” yelled Harry. 

His jinx hit Amycus in the chest: He gave a piglike 
squeal of pain, was lifted off his feet and slammed 
into the opposite wall, slid down it, and fell out of 
sight behind Ron, Professor McGonagall, and Lupin, 
each of whom was battling a separate Death Eater. 
Beyond them, Harry saw Tonks fighting an enormous 
blond wizard who was sending curses flying in all 
directions, so that they ricocheted off the walls 
around them, cracking stone, shattering the nearest 
window — 

“Harry, where did you come from?” Ginny cried, but 
there was no time to answer her. He put his head 
down and sprinted forward, narrowly avoiding a blast 
that erupted over his head, showering them all in bits 
of wall. Snape must not escape, he must catch up 
with Snape — 

“Take that\” shouted Professor McGonagall, and Harry 
glimpsed the female Death Eater, Alecto, sprinting 
away down the corridor with her arms over her head, 
her brother right behind her. He launched himself 
after them but his foot caught on something, and next 
moment he was lying across someone’s legs. Looking 
around, he saw Neville’s pale, round face flat against 
the floor. 

“Neville, are you — ?” 

“M’all right,” muttered Neville, who was clutching his 
stomach, “Harry ... Snape ’n’ Malfoy ... ran past ...” 



Page | 673 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I know, I’m on it!” said Harry, aiming a hex from the 
floor at the enormous blond Death Eater who was 
causing most of the chaos. The man gave a howl of 
pain as the spell hit him in the face: He wheeled 
around, staggered, and then pounded away after the 
brother and sister. Harry scrambled up from the floor 
and began to sprint along the corridor, ignoring the 
bangs issuing from behind him, the yells of the others 
to come back, and the mute call of the figures on the 
ground whose fate he did not yet know. ... 

He skidded around the corner, his trainers slippery 
with blood; Snape had an immense head start. Was it 
possible that he had already entered the cabinet in 
the Room of Requirement, or had the Order made 
steps to secure it, to prevent the Death Eaters 
retreating that way? He could hear nothing but his 
own pounding feet, his own hammering heart as he 
sprinted along the next empty corridor, but then 
spotted a bloody footprint that showed at least one of 
the fleeing Death Eaters was heading toward the front 
doors — perhaps the Room of Requirement was 
indeed blocked — 

He skidded around another corner and a curse flew 
past him; he dived behind a suit of armor that 
exploded. He saw the brother and sister running 
down the marble staircase ahead and aimed jinxes at 
them, but merely hit several bewigged witches in a 
portrait on the landing, who ran screeching into 
neighboring paintings. As he leapt the wreckage of 
armor, Harry heard more shouts and screams; other 
people within the castle seemed to have awoken. ... 

He pelted toward a shortcut, hoping to overtake the 
brother and sister and close in on Snape and Malfoy, 
who must surely have reached the grounds by now. 
Remembering to leap the vanishing step halfway 
down the concealed staircase, he burst through a 
Page | 674 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




tapestry at the bottom and out into a corridor where a 
number of bewildered and pajama-clad Hufflepuffs 
stood. 

“Harry! We heard a noise, and someone said 
something about the Dark Mark — ” began Ernie 
Macmillan. 

“Out of the way!” yelled Harry, knocking two boys 
aside as he sprinted toward the landing and down the 
remainder of the marble staircase. The oak front 
doors had been blasted open, there were smears of 
blood on the flagstones, and several terrified students 
stood huddled against the walls, one or two still 
cowering with their arms over their faces. The giant 
Gryffindor hourglass had been hit by a curse, and the 
rubies within were still falling, with a loud rattle, onto 
the flagstones below. 

Harry flew across the entrance hall and out into the 
dark grounds: He could just make out three figures 
racing across the lawn, heading for the gates beyond 
which they could Disapparate — by the looks of them, 
the huge blond Death Eater and, some way ahead of 
him, Snape and Malfoy ... 

The cold night air ripped at Harry’s lungs as he tore 
after them; he saw a flash of light in the distance that 
momentarily silhouetted his quarry. He did not know 
what it was but continued to run, not yet near 
enough to get a good aim with a curse — 

Another flash, shouts, retaliatory jets of light, and 
Harry understood: Hagrid had emerged from his 
cabin and was trying to stop the Death Eaters 
escaping, and though every breath seemed to shred 
his lungs and the stitch in his chest was like fire, 
Harry sped up as an unbidden voice in his head said: 
not Hagrid . . . not Hagrid too . . . 

Page | 675 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Something caught Harry hard in the small of the back 
and he fell forward, his face smacking the ground, 
blood pouring out of both nostrils: He knew, even as 
he rolled over, his wand ready, that the brother and 
sister he had overtaken using his shortcut were 
closing in behind him. ... 

“Impedimenta).” he yelled as he rolled over again, 
crouching close to the dark ground, and miraculously 
his jinx hit one of them, who stumbled and fell, 
tripping up the other; Harry leapt to his feet and 
sprinted on after Snape. 

And now he saw the vast outline of Hagrid, 
illuminated by the light of the crescent moon revealed 
suddenly behind clouds; the blond Death Eater was 
aiming curse after curse at the gamekeeper; but 
Hagrid’s immense strength and the toughened skin 
he had inherited from his giantess mother seemed to 
be protecting him. Snape and Malfoy, however, were 
still running; they would soon be beyond the gates, 
able to Disapparate — 

Harry tore past Hagrid and his opponent, took aim at 
Snape’s back, and yelled, “Stupefy\” 

He missed; the jet of red light soared past Snape’s 
head; Snape shouted, “Run, Draco\” and turned. 
Twenty yards apart, he and Harry looked at each 
other before raising their wands simultaneously. 

“Cruc — ” 

But Snape parried the curse, knocking Harry 
backward off his feet before he could complete it; 
Harry rolled over and scrambled back up again as the 
huge Death Eater behind him yelled, “Incendiol” Harry 
heard an explosive bang and a dancing orange light 
spilled over all of them: Hagrid’s house was on fire. 
Page | 676 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Fang’s in there, yer evil — !” Hagrid bellowed. 

“Cruc — ” yelled Harry for the second time, aiming for 
the figure ahead illuminated in the dancing firelight, 
but Snape blocked the spell again. Harry could see 
him sneering. 

“No Unforgivable Curses from you, Potter!” he 
shouted over the rushing of the flames, Hagrid’s yells, 
and the wild yelping of the trapped Fang. “You haven’t 
got the nerve or the ability — ” 

“Incarc — ” Harry roared, but Snape deflected the spell 
with an almost lazy flick of his arm. 

“Fight back!” Harry screamed at him. “Fight back, you 
cowardly — ” 

“Coward, did you call me, Potter?” shouted Snape. 
“Your father would never attack me unless it was four 
on one, what would you call him, I wonder?” 

“ Stupe — ” 

“Blocked again and again and again until you learn to 
keep your mouth shut and your mind closed, Potter!” 
sneered Snape, deflecting the curse once more. “Now 
come!” he shouted at the huge Death Eater behind 
Harry. “It is time to be gone, before the Ministry turns 
up — ” 



“Impedi — ” 

But before he could finish this jinx, excruciating pain 
hit Harry; he keeled over in the grass. Someone was 
screaming, he would surely die of this agony, Snape 
was going to torture him to death or madness — 



Page | 677 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“No!” roared Snape’s voice and the pain stopped as 
suddenly as it had started; Harry lay curled on the 
dark grass, clutching his wand and panting; 
somewhere overhead Snape was shouting, “Have you 
forgotten our orders? Potter belongs to the Dark Lord 
— we are to leave him! Go! Go!” 

And Harry felt the ground shudder under his face as 
the brother and sister and the enormous Death Eater 
obeyed, running toward the gates. Harry uttered an 
inarticulate yell of rage: In that instant, he cared not 
whether he lived or died. Pushing himself to his feet 
again, he staggered blindly toward Snape, the man he 
now hated as much as he hated Voldemort himself — 

“Sectum — !” 

Snape flicked his wand and the curse was repelled yet 
again; but Harry was mere feet away now and he 
could see Snape’s face clearly at last: He was no 
longer sneering or jeering; the blazing flames showed 
a face full of rage. Mustering all his powers of 
concentration, Harry thought, Levi — 

“No, Potter!” screamed Snape. There was a loud BANG 
and Harry was soaring backward, hitting the ground 
hard again, and this time his wand flew out of his 
hand. He could hear Hagrid yelling and Fang howling 
as Snape closed in and looked down on him where he 
lay, wandless and defenseless as Dumbledore had 
been. Snape’s pale face, illuminated by the flaming 
cabin, was suffused with hatred just as it had been 
before he had cursed Dumbledore. 

“You dare use my own spells against me, Potter? It 
was I who invented them — I, the Half-Blood Prince! 
And you’d turn my inventions on me, like your filthy 
father, would you? I don’t think so ... no!” 



Page | 678 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Harry had dived for his wand; Snape shot a hex at it 
and it flew feet away into the darkness and out of 
sight. 

“Kill me then,” panted Harry, who felt no fear at all, 
but only rage and contempt. “Kill me like you killed 
him, you coward — ” 

“DONT — ” screamed Snape, and his face was 
suddenly demented, inhuman, as though he was in 
as much pain as the yelping, howling dog stuck in the 
burning house behind them — “CALL ME COWARD!” 

And he slashed at the air: Harry felt a white-hot, 
whiplike something hit him across the face and was 
slammed backward into the ground. Spots of light 
burst in front of his eyes and for a moment all the 
breath seemed to have gone from his body, then he 
heard a rush of wings above him and something 
enormous obscured the stars. Buckbeak had flown at 
Snape, who staggered backward as the razor-sharp 
claws slashed at him. As Harry raised himself into a 
sitting position, his head still swimming from its last 
contact with the ground, he saw Snape running as 
hard as he could, the enormous beast flapping behind 
him and screeching as Harry had never heard him 
screech — 

Harry struggled to his feet, looking around groggily for 
his wand, hoping to give chase again, but even as his 
fingers fumbled in the grass, discarding twigs, he 
knew it would be too late, and sure enough, by the 
time he had located his wand, he turned only to see 
the hippogriff circling the gates. Snape had managed 
to Disapparate just beyond the school’s boundaries. 

“Hagrid,” muttered Harry, still dazed, looking around. 
“HAGRID?” 



Page | 679 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




He stumbled toward the burning house as an 
enormous figure emerged from out of the flames 
carrying Fang on his back. With a cry of 
thankfulness, Harry sank to his knees; he was 
shaking in every limb, his body ached all over, and 
his breath came in painful stabs. 

“Yeh all righ’, Harry? Yeh all righ’? Speak ter me, 
Harry. ...” 

Hagrid’s huge, hairy face was swimming above Harry, 
blocking out the stars. Harry could smell burnt wood 
and dog hair; he put out a hand and felt Fang’s 
reassuringly warm and alive body quivering beside 
him. 

“I’m all right,” panted Harry. “Are you?” 

“ ’Course I am ... take more’n that ter finish me.” 

Hagrid put his hands under Harry’s arms and raised 
him up with such force that Harry’s feet momentarily 
left the ground before Hagrid set him upright again. 

He could see blood trickling down Hagrid’s cheek 
from a deep cut under one eye, which was swelling 
rapidly. 

“We should put out your house,” said Harry, “the 
charm’s ‘Aguamenti’ ...” 

“Knew it was summat like that,” mumbled Hagrid, 
and he raised a smoldering pink, flowery umbrella 
and said, “Aguamenti\” 

A jet of water flew out of the umbrella tip. Harry 
raised his wand arm, which felt like lead, and 
murmured “Aguamenti’ too: Together, he and Hagrid 
poured water on the house until the last flame was 
extinguished. 

Page | 680 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“S’not too bad,” said Hagrid hopefully a few minutes 
later, looking at the smoking wreck. “Nothin’ 
Dumbledore won’ be able to put righ’ ...” 

Harry felt a searing pain in his stomach at the sound 
of the name. In the silence and the stillness, horror 
rose inside him. 

“Hagrid ...” 

“I was bindin’ up a couple o’ bowtruckle legs when I 
heard ’em cornin’,” said Hagrid sadly, still staring at 
his wrecked cabin. “They’ll’ve bin burnt ter twigs, 
poor little things. ...” 

“Hagrid ...” 

“But what happened, Harry? I jus’ saw them Death 
Eaters runnin’ down from the castle, but what the 
ruddy hell was Snape doin’ with ’em? Where’s he gone 
— was he chasin’ them?” 

“He ...” Harry cleared his throat; it was dry from panic 
and the smoke. “Hagrid, he killed ...” 

“Killed?” said Hagrid loudly, staring down at Harry. 
“Snape killed? What’re yeh on abou’, Harry?” 

“Dumbledore,” said Harry. “Snape killed ... 
Dumbledore.” 

Hagrid simply looked at him, the little of his face that 
could be seen completely blank, uncomprehending. 

“Dumbledore wha’, Harry?” 

“He’s dead. Snape killed him. ...” 



Page | 681 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’ say that,” said Hagrid roughly. “Snape kill 
Dumbledore — don’ be stupid, Harry. Wha’s made 
yeh say tha’?” 

“I saw it happen.” 

“Yeh couldn’ have.” 

“I saw it, Hagrid.” 

Hagrid shook his head; his expression was 
disbelieving but sympathetic, and Harry knew that 
Hagrid thought he had sustained a blow to the head, 
that he was confused, perhaps by the aftereffects of a 
jinx. ... 

“What musta happened was, Dumbledore musta told 
Snape ter go with them Death Eaters,” Hagrid said 
confidently. “I suppose he’s gotta keep his cover. 

Look, let’s get yeh back up ter the school. Come on, 
Harry. ...” 

Harry did not attempt to argue or explain. He was still 
shaking uncontrollably. Hagrid would find out soon 
enough, too soon. ... As they directed their steps back 
toward the castle, Harry saw that many of its 
windows were lit now. He could imagine, clearly, the 
scenes inside as people moved from room to room, 
telling each other that Death Eaters had got in, that 
the Mark was shining over Hogwarts, that somebody 
must have been killed. ... 

The oak front doors stood open ahead of them, light 
flooding out onto the drive and the lawn. Slowly, 
uncertainly, dressing-gowned people were creeping 
down the steps, looking around nervously for some 
sign of the Death Eaters who had fled into the night. 
Harry’s eyes, however, were fixed upon the ground at 
the foot of the tallest tower. He imagined that he 
Page | 682 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




could see a black, huddled mass lying in the grass 
there, though he was really too far away to see 
anything of the sort. Even as he stared wordlessly at 
the place where he thought Dumbledore ’s body must 
lie, however, he saw people beginning to move toward 
it. 

“What’re they all lookin’ at?” said Hagrid, as he and 
Harry approached the castle front, Fang keeping as 
close as he could to their ankles. “Wha’s tha’, lyin’ on 
the grass?” Hagrid added sharply, heading now 
toward the foot of the Astronomy Tower, where a 
small crowd was congregating. “See it, Harry? Righ’ at 
the foot o’ the tower? Under where the Mark ... Blimey 
... yeh don’ think someone got thrown — ?” 

Hagrid fell silent, the thought apparently too horrible 
to express aloud. Harry walked alongside him, feeling 
the aches and pains in his face and his legs where the 
various hexes of the last half hour had hit him, 
though in an oddly detached way, as though 
somebody near him was suffering them. What was 
real and inescapable was the awful pressing feeling in 
his chest. ... 

He and Hagrid moved, dreamlike, through the 
murmuring crowd to the very front, where the 
dumbstruck students and teachers had left a gap. 

Harry heard Hagrid ’s moan of pain and shock, but he 
did not stop; he walked slowly forward until he 
reached the place where Dumbledore lay and 
crouched down beside him. He had known there was 
no hope from the moment that the full Body-Bind 
Curse Dumbledore had placed upon him lifted, 
known that it could have happened only because its 
caster was dead, but there was still no preparation for 
seeing him here, spread-eagled, broken: the greatest 
wizard Harry had ever, or would ever, meet. 

Page | 683 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore’s eyes were closed; but for the strange 
angle of his arms and legs, he might have been 
sleeping. Harry reached out, straightened the half- 
moon spectacles upon the crooked nose, and wiped a 
trickle of blood from the mouth with his own sleeve. 
Then he gazed down at the wise old face and tried to 
absorb the enormous and incomprehensible truth: 
that never again would Dumbledore speak to him, 
never again could he help. ... 

The crowd murmured behind Harry. After what 
seemed like a long time, he became aware that he was 
kneeling upon something hard and looked down. 

The locket they had managed to steal so many hours 
before had fallen out of Dumbledore’s pocket. It had 
opened, perhaps due to the force with which it hit the 
ground. And although he could not feel more shock or 
horror or sadness than he felt already, Harry knew, 
as he picked it up, that there was something wrong. 



He turned the locket over in his hands. This was 
neither as large as the locket he remembered seeing 
in the Pensieve, nor were there any markings upon it, 
no sign of the ornate S that was supposed to be 
Slytherin’s mark. Moreover, there was nothing inside 
but for a scrap of folded parchment wedged tightly 
into the place where a portrait should have been. 

Automatically, without really thinking about what he 
was doing, Harry pulled out the fragment of 
parchment, opened it, and read by the light of the 
many wands that had now been lit behind him: 

To the Dark Lord 

I know I will be dead long before you read this 



Page | 684 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




but I want you to know that it was I who discovered 
your secret 

I have stolen the real Horcrux and intend to destroy it 
as soon as I can. 

I face death in the hope that when you meet your 
match, 

you will be mortal once more. 

R.A.B. 

Harry neither knew nor cared what the message 
meant. Only one thing mattered: This was not a 
Horcrux. Dumbledore had weakened himself by 
drinking that terrible potion for nothing. Harry 
crumpled the parchment in his hand, and his eyes 
burned with tears as behind him Fang began to howl. 



Page | 685 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




z? 




THE PHOENIX LAMENT 

“C’mere, Harry ...” 

“No.” 

“Yeh can’ stay here, Harry. ... Come on, now. ...” 

“No.” 

He did not want to leave Dumbledore’s side, he did 
not want to move anywhere. Hagrid’s hand on his 
shoulder was trembling. Then another voice said, 
“Harry, come on.” 

A much smaller and warmer hand had enclosed his 
and was pulling him upward. He obeyed its pressure 
without really thinking about it. Only as he walked 
blindly back through the crowd did he realize, from a 
trace of flowery scent on the air, that it was Ginny 
who was leading him back into the castle. 
Incomprehensible voices battered him, sobs and 
shouts and wails stabbed the night, but Harry and 
Ginny walked on, back up the steps into the entrance 
Page | 686 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



hall. Faces swam on the edges of Harry’s vision, 
people were peering at him, whispering, wondering, 
and Gryffindor rubies glistened on the floor like drops 
of blood as they made their way toward the marble 
staircase. 

“We’re going to the hospital wing,” said Ginny. 

“I’m not hurt,” said Harry. 

“It’s McGonagall’s orders,” said Ginny. “Everyone’s up 
there, Ron and Hermione and Lupin and everyone — ” 

Fear stirred in Harry’s chest again: He had forgotten 
the inert figures he had left behind. 

“Ginny, who else is dead?” 

“Don’t worry, none of us.” 

“But the Dark Mark — Malfoy said he stepped over a 
body — ” 

“He stepped over Bill, but it’s all right, he’s alive.” 

There was something in her voice, however, that 
Harry knew boded ill. 

“Are you sure?” 

“Of course I’m sure ... he’s a — a bit of a mess, that’s 
all. Greyback attacked him. Madam Pomfrey says he 
won’t — won’t look the same anymore. ...” 

Ginny ’s voice trembled a little. 

“We don’t really know what the aftereffects will be — I 
mean, Greyback being a werewolf, but not 
transformed at the time.” 

Page | 687 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“But the others . . . There were other bodies on the 
ground. ...” 

“Neville and Professor Flitwick are both hurt, but 
Madam Pomfrey says they’ll be all right. And a Death 
Eater’s dead, he got hit by a Killing Curse that huge 
blond one was firing off everywhere — Harry, if we 
hadn’t had your Felix potion, I think we’d all have 
been killed, but everything seemed to just miss us — ” 

They had reached the hospital wing. Pushing open 
the doors, Harry saw Neville lying, apparently asleep, 
in a bed near the door. Ron, Hermione, Luna, Tonks, 
and Lupin were gathered around another bed near 
the far end of the ward. At the sound of the doors 
opening, they all looked up. Hermione ran to Harry 
and hugged him; Lupin moved forward too, looking 
anxious. 

“Are you all right, Harry?” 

“I’m fine. ... How’s Bill?” 

Nobody answered. Harry looked over Hermione’s 
shoulder and saw an unrecognizable face lying on 
Bill’s pillow, so badly slashed and ripped that he 
looked grotesque. Madam Pomfrey was dabbing at his 
wounds with some harsh-smelling green ointment. 
Harry remembered how Snape had mended Malfoy’s 
Sectumsempra wounds so easily with his wand. 

“Can’t you fix them with a charm or something?” he 
asked the matron. 

“No charm will work on these,” said Madam Pomfrey. 
“I’ve tried everything I know, but there is no cure for 
werewolf bites.” 



Page | 688 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“But he wasn’t bitten at the full moon,” said Ron, who 
was gazing down into his brother’s face as though he 
could somehow force him to mend just by staring. 
“Greyback hadn’t transformed, so surely Bill won’t be 
a — a real — ?” 

He looked uncertainly at Lupin. 

“No, I don’t think that Bill will be a true werewolf,” 
said Lupin, “but that does not mean that there won’t 
be some contamination. Those are cursed wounds. 
They are unlikely ever to heal fully, and — and Bill 
might have some wolfish characteristics from now 
on.” 

“Dumbledore might know something that’d work, 
though,” Ron said. “Where is he? Bill fought those 
maniacs on Dumbledore’s orders, Dumbledore owes 
him, he can’t leave him in this state — ” 

“Ron — Dumbledore’s dead,” said Ginny. 

“No!” Lupin looked wildly from Ginny to Harry, as 
though hoping the latter might contradict her, but 
when Harry did not, Lupin collapsed into a chair 
beside Bill’s bed, his hands over his face. Harry had 
never seen Lupin lose control before; he felt as though 
he was intruding upon something private, indecent. 

He turned away and caught Ron’s eye instead, 
exchanging in silence a look that confirmed what 
Ginny had said. 

“How did he die?” whispered Tonks. “How did it 
happen?” 

“Snape killed him,” said Harry. “I was there, I saw it. 
We arrived back on the Astronomy Tower because 
that’s where the Mark was. ... Dumbledore was ill, he 
was weak, but I think he realized it was a trap when 

Page | 689 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




we heard footsteps running up the stairs. He 
immobilized me, I couldn’t do anything, I was under 
the Invisibility Cloak — and then Malfoy came 
through the door and disarmed him — ” 

Hermione clapped her hands to her mouth and Ron 
groaned. Luna’s mouth trembled. 

“ — more Death Eaters arrived — and then Snape — 
and Snape did it. The Avada Kedavra.” Harry couldn’t 
go on. 

Madam Pomfrey burst into tears. Nobody paid her 
any attention except Ginny, who whispered, “Shh! 
Listen!” 

Gulping, Madam Pomfrey pressed her fingers to her 
mouth, her eyes wide. Somewhere out in the 
darkness, a phoenix was singing in a way Harry had 
never heard before: a stricken lament of terrible 
beauty. And Harry felt, as he had felt about phoenix 
song before, that the music was inside him, not 
without: It was his own grief turned magically to song 
that echoed across the grounds and through the 
castle windows. 

How long they all stood there, listening, he did not 
know, nor why it seemed to ease their pain a little to 
listen to the sound of their mourning, but it felt like a 
long time later that the hospital door opened again 
and Professor McGonagall entered the ward. Like all 
the rest, she bore marks of the recent battle: There 
were grazes on her face and her robes were ripped. 

“Molly and Arthur are on their way,” she said, and the 
spell of the music was broken: Everyone roused 
themselves as though coming out of trances, turning 
again to look at Bill, or else to rub their own eyes, 
shake their heads. “Harry, what happened? According 
Page | 690 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




to Hagrid you were with Professor Dumbledore when 
he — when it happened. He says Professor Snape was 
involved in some — ” 

“Snape killed Dumbledore,” said Harry. 

She stared at him for a moment, then swayed 
alarmingly; Madam Pomfrey, who seemed to have 
pulled herself together, ran forward, conjuring a chair 
from thin air, which she pushed under McGonagall. 

“Snape,” repeated McGonagall faintly, falling into the 
chair. “We all wondered ... but he trusted ... always ... 
Snape ... I can’t believe it. ...” 

“Snape was a highly accomplished Occlumens,” said 
Lupin, his voice uncharacteristically harsh. “We 
always knew that.” 

“But Dumbledore swore he was on our side!” 
whispered Tonks. “I always thought Dumbledore 
must know something about Snape that we didn’t. ...” 

“He always hinted that he had an ironclad reason for 
trusting Snape,” muttered Professor McGonagall, now 
dabbing at the corners of her leaking eyes with a 
tartan- edged handkerchief. “I mean ... with Snape ’s 
history ... of course people were bound to wonder . . . 
but Dumbledore told me explicitly that Snape ’s 
repentance was absolutely genuine. ... Wouldn’t hear 
a word against him!” 

“I’d love to know what Snape told him to convince 
him,” said Tonks. 

“I know,” said Harry, and they all turned to look at 
him. “Snape passed Voldemort the information that 
made Voldemort hunt down my mum and dad. Then 
Snape told Dumbledore he hadn’t realized what he 

Page | 691 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




was doing, he was really sorry he’d done it, sorry that 
they were dead.” 

They all stared at him. 

“And Dumbledore believed that?” said Lupin 
incredulously. “Dumbledore believed Snape was sorry 
James was dead? Snape hated James. ...” 

“And he didn’t think my mother was worth a damn 
either,” said Harry, “because she was Muggle-born. ... 
‘Mudblood,’ he called her. ...” 

Nobody asked how Harry knew this. All of them 
seemed to be lost in horrified shock, trying to digest 
the monstrous truth of what had happened. 

“This is all my fault,” said Professor McGonagall 
suddenly. She looked disoriented, twisting her wet 
handkerchief in her hands. “My fault. I sent Filius to 
fetch Snape tonight, I actually sent for him to come 
and help us! If I hadn’t alerted Snape to what was 
going on, he might never have joined forces with the 
Death Eaters. I don’t think he knew they were there 
before Filius told him, I don’t think he knew they were 
coming.” 

“It isn’t your fault, Minerva,” said Lupin firmly. “We 
all wanted more help, we were glad to think Snape 
was on his way. ...” 

“So when he arrived at the fight, he joined in on the 
Death Eaters’ side?” asked Harry, who wanted every 
detail of Snape ’s duplicity and infamy, feverishly 
collecting more reasons to hate him, to swear 
vengeance. 

“I don’t know exactly how it happened,” said Professor 
McGonagall distractedly. “It’s all so confusing. ... 

Page | 692 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore had told us that he would be leaving the 
school for a few hours and that we were to patrol the 
corridors just in case ... Remus, Bill, and 
Nymphadora were to join us ... and so we patrolled. 

All seemed quiet. Every secret passageway out of the 
school was covered. We knew nobody could fly in. 
There were powerful enchantments on every entrance 
into the castle. I still don’t know how the Death 
Eaters can possibly have entered. ...” 

“I do,” said Harry, and he explained, briefly, about the 
pair of Vanishing Cabinets and the magical pathway 
they formed. “So they got in through the Room of 
Requirement.” 

Almost against his will he glanced from Ron to 
Hermione, both of whom looked devastated. 

“I messed up, Harry,” said Ron bleakly. “We did like 
you told us: We checked the Marauder’s Map and we 
couldn’t see Malfoy on it, so we thought he must be in 
the Room of Requirement, so me, Ginny, and Neville 
went to keep watch on it ... but Malfoy got past us.” 

“He came out of the room about an hour after we 
started keeping watch,” said Ginny. “He was on his 
own, clutching that awful shriveled arm — ” 

“His Hand of Glory,” said Ron. “Gives light only to the 
holder, remember?” 

“Anyway,” Ginny went on, “he must have been 
checking whether the coast was clear to let the Death 
Eaters out, because the moment he saw us he threw 
something into the air and it all went pitch-black — ” 

“ — Peruvian Instant Darkness Powder,” said Ron 
bitterly. “Fred and George’s. I’m going to be having a 



Page | 693 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




word with them about who they let buy their 
products.” 

“We tried everything, Lumos, Incendio,” said Ginny. 
“Nothing would penetrate the darkness; all we could 
do was grope our way out of the corridor again, and 
meanwhile we could hear people rushing past us. 
Obviously Malfoy could see because of that hand 
thing and was guiding them, but we didn’t dare use 
any curses or anything in case we hit each other, and 
by the time we’d reached a corridor that was light, 
they’d gone.” 

“Luckily,” said Lupin hoarsely, “Ron, Ginny, and 
Neville ran into us almost immediately and told us 
what had happened. We found the Death Eaters 
minutes later, heading in the direction of the 
Astronomy Tower. Malfoy obviously hadn’t expected 
more people to be on the watch; he seemed to have 
exhausted his supply of Darkness Powder, at any 
rate. A fight broke out, they scattered and we gave 
chase. One of them, Gibbon, broke away and headed 
up the tower stairs — ” 

“To set off the Mark?” asked Harry. 

“He must have done, yes, they must have arranged 
that before they left the Room of Requirement,” said 
Lupin. “But I don’t think Gibbon liked the idea of 
waiting up there alone for Dumbledore, because he 
came running back downstairs to rejoin the fight and 
was hit by a Killing Curse that just missed me.” 

“So if Ron was watching the Room of Requirement 
with Ginny and Neville,” said Harry, turning to 
Hermione, “were you — ?” 

“Outside Snape’s office, yes,” whispered Hermione, 
her eyes sparkling with tears, “with Luna. We hung 

Page | 694 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




around for ages outside it and nothing happened. ... 
We didn’t know what was going on upstairs, Ron had 
taken the map. ... It was nearly midnight when 
Professor Flitwick came sprinting down into the 
dungeons. He was shouting about Death Eaters in 
the castle, I don’t think he really registered that Luna 
and I were there at all, he just burst his way into 
Snape’s office and we heard him saying that Snape 
had to go back with him and help and then we heard 
a loud thump and Snape came hurtling out of his 
room and he saw us and — and — ” 

“What?” Harry urged her. 

“I was so stupid, Harry!” said Hermione in a high- 
pitched whisper. “He said Professor Flitwick had 
collapsed and that we should go and take care of him 
while he — while he went to help fight the Death 
Eaters — ” She covered her face in shame and 
continued to talk into her fingers, so that her voice 
was muffled. “We went into his office to see if we 
could help Professor Flitwick and found him 
unconscious on the floor ... and oh, it’s so obvious 
now, Snape must have Stupefied Flitwick, but we 
didn’t realize, Harry, we didn’t realize, we just let 
Snape go!” 

“It’s not your fault,” said Lupin firmly. “Hermione, 
had you not obeyed Snape and got out of the way, he 
probably would have killed you and Luna.” 

“So then he came upstairs,” said Harry, who was 
watching Snape running up the marble staircase in 
his mind’s eye, his black robes billowing behind him 
as ever, pulling his wand from under his cloak as he 
ascended, “and he found the place where you were all 
fighting. ...” 



Page | 695 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“We were in trouble, we were losing,” said Tonks in a 
low voice. “Gibbon was down, but the rest of the 
Death Eaters seemed ready to fight to the death. 
Neville had been hurt, Bill had been savaged by 
Greyback ... It was all dark . . . curses flying 
everywhere ... The Malfoy boy had vanished, he must 
have slipped past, up the stairs ... then more of them 
ran after him, but one of them blocked the stair 
behind them with some kind of curse. ... Neville ran 
at it and got thrown up into the air — ” 

“None of us could break through,” said Ron, “and that 
massive Death Eater was still firing off jinxes all over 
the place, they were bouncing off the walls and barely 
missing us. ...” 

“And then Snape was there,” said Tonks, “and then 
he wasn’t — ” 

“I saw him running toward us, but that huge Death 
Eater’s jinx just missed me right afterward and I 
ducked and lost track of things,” said Ginny. 

“I saw him run straight through the cursed barrier as 
though it wasn’t there,” said Lupin. “I tried to follow 
him, but was thrown back just like Neville. ...” 

“He must have known a spell we didn’t,” whispered 
McGonagall. “After all — he was the Defense Against 
the Dark Arts teacher. ... I just assumed that he was 
in a hurry to chase after the Death Eaters who’d 
escaped up to the tower. ...” 

“He was,” said Harry savagely, “but to help them, not 
to stop them ... and I’ll bet you had to have a Dark 
Mark to get through that barrier — so what happened 
when he came back down?” 



Page | 696 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, the big Death Eater had just fired off a hex that 
caused half the ceiling to fall in, and also broke the 
curse blocking the stairs,” said Lupin. “We all ran 
forward — those of us who were still standing anyway 
— and then Snape and the boy emerged out of the 
dust — obviously, none of us attacked them — ” 

“We just let them pass,” said Tonks in a hollow voice. 
“We thought they were being chased by the Death 
Eaters — and next thing, the other Death Eaters and 
Greyback were back and we were fighting again — I 
thought I heard Snape shout something, but I don’t 
know what — ” 

“He shouted, ‘It’s over,’ ” said Harry. “He’d done what 
he’d meant to do.” 

They all fell silent. Fawkes’s lament was still echoing 
over the dark grounds outside. As the music 
reverberated upon the air, unbidden, unwelcome 
thoughts slunk into Harry’s mind. ... Had they taken 
Dumbledore’s body from the foot of the tower yet? 
What would happen to it next? Where would it rest? 
He clenched his fists tightly in his pockets. He could 
feel the small cold lump of the fake Horcrux against 
the knuckles of his right hand. 

The doors of the hospital wing burst open, making 
them all jump: Mr. and Mrs. Weasley were striding up 
the ward, Fleur just behind them, her beautiful face 
terrified. 

“Molly — Arthur — ” said Professor McGonagall, 
jumping up and hurrying to greet them. “I am so 
sorry — ” 

“Bill,” whispered Mrs. Weasley, darting past Professor 
McGonagall as she caught sight of Bill’s mangled face. 
“Oh, Bill'.” 

Page | 697 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Lupin and Tonks had got up hastily and retreated so 
that Mr. and Mrs. Weasley could get nearer to the 
bed. Mrs. Weasley bent over her son and pressed her 
lips to his bloody forehead. 

“You said Greyback attacked him?” Mr. Weasley 
asked Professor McGonagall distractedly. “But he 
hadn’t transformed? So what does that mean? What 
will happen to Bill?” 

“We don’t yet know,” said Professor McGonagall, 
looking helplessly at Lupin. 

“There will probably be some contamination, Arthur,” 
said Lupin. “It is an odd case, possibly unique. ... We 
don’t know what his behavior might be like when he 
awakens. ...” 

Mrs. Weasley took the nasty-smelling ointment from 
Madam Pomfrey and began dabbing at Bill’s wounds. 

“And Dumbledore ...” said Mr. Weasley. “Minerva, is it 
true ... Is he really ... ?” 

As Professor McGonagall nodded, Harry felt Ginny 
move beside him and looked at her. Her slightly 
narrowed eyes were fixed upon Fleur, who was gazing 
down at Bill with a frozen expression on her face. 

“Dumbledore gone,” whispered Mr. Weasley, but Mrs. 
Weasley had eyes only for her eldest son; she began 
to sob, tears falling onto Bill’s mutilated face. 

“Of course, it doesn’t matter how he looks. ... It’s not 
r-really important . . . but he was a very handsome 
little b-boy . . . always very handsome . . . and he was g- 
going to be married!” 



Page | 698 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“And what do you mean by zat?” said Fleur suddenly 
and loudly. “What do you mean, ‘’e was going to be 
married?’ ” 

Mrs. Weasley raised her tear-stained face, looking 
startled. “Well — only that — ” 

“You theenk Bill will not wish to marry me anymore?” 
demanded Fleur. “You theenk, because of these bites, 
he will not love me?” 

“No, that’s not what I — ” 

“Because ’e will!” said Fleur, drawing herself up to her 
full height and throwing back her long mane of silver 
hair. “It would take more zan a werewolf to stop Bill 
loving me!” 

“Well, yes, I’m sure,” said Mrs. Weasley, “but I 
thought perhaps — given how — how he — ” 

“You thought I would not weesh to marry him? Or 
per’aps, you hoped?” said Fleur, her nostrils flaring. 
“What do I care how he looks? I am good-looking 
enough for both of us, I theenk! All these scars show 
is zat my husband is brave! And I shall do zat!” she 
added fiercely, pushing Mrs. Weasley aside and 
snatching the ointment from her. 

Mrs. Weasley fell back against her husband and 
watched Fleur mopping up Bill’s wounds with a most 
curious expression upon her face. Nobody said 
anything; Harry did not dare move. Like everybody 
else, he was waiting for the explosion. 

“Our Great-Auntie Muriel,” said Mrs. Weasley after a 
long pause, “has a very beautiful tiara — goblin-made 
— which I am sure I could persuade her to lend you 



Page | 699 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




for the wedding. She is very fond of Bill, you know, 
and it would look lovely with your hair.” 



“Thank you,” said Fleur stiffly. “I am sure zat will be 
lovely.” 

And then, Harry did not quite see how it happened, 
both women were crying and hugging each other. 
Completely bewildered, wondering whether the world 
had gone mad, he turned around: Ron looked as 
stunned as he felt and Ginny and Hermione were 
exchanging startled looks. 

“You see!” said a strained voice. Tonks was glaring at 
Lupin. “She still wants to marry him, even though 
he’s been bitten! She doesn’t care!” 

“It’s different,” said Lupin, barely moving his lips and 
looking suddenly tense. “Bill will not be a full 
werewolf. The cases are completely — ” 

“But I don’t care either, I don’t care!” said Tonks, 
seizing the front of Lupin’s robes and shaking them. 
“I’ve told you a million times. ...” 

And the meaning of Tonks’s Patronus and her mouse- 
colored hair, and the reason she had come running to 
find Dumbledore when she had heard a rumor 
someone had been attacked by Greyback, all 
suddenly became clear to Harry; it had not been 
Sirius that Tonks had fallen in love with after all. 

“And I’ve told you a million times,” said Lupin, 
refusing to meet her eyes, staring at the floor, “that I 
am too old for you, too poor ... too dangerous. ...” 

“I’ve said all along you’re taking a ridiculous line on 
this, Remus,” said Mrs. Weasley over Fleur’s shoulder 
as she patted her on the back. 

Page | 700 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I am not being ridiculous,” said Lupin steadily. 
“Tonks deserves somebody young and whole.” 

“But she wants you,” said Mr. Weasley, with a small 
smile. “And after all, Remus, young and whole men do 
not necessarily remain so.” 

He gestured sadly at his son, lying between them. 

“This is ... not the moment to discuss it,” said Lupin, 
avoiding everybody’s eyes as he looked around 
distractedly. “Dumbledore is dead. ...” 

“Dumbledore would have been happier than anybody 
to think that there was a little more love in the world,” 
said Professor McGonagall curtly, just as the hospital 
doors opened again and Hagrid walked in. 

The little of his face that was not obscured by hair or 
beard was soaking and swollen; he was shaking with 
tears, a vast, spotted handkerchief in his hand. 

“I’ve ... I’ve done it, Professor,” he choked. “M-moved 
him. Professor Sprout’s got the kids back in bed. 
Professor Flitwick’s lyin’ down, but he says he’ll be all 
righ’ in a jiffy, an’ Professor Slughorn says the 
Ministry’s bin informed.” 

“Thank you, Hagrid,” said Professor McGonagall, 
standing up at once and turning to look at the group 
around Bill’s bed. “I shall have to see the Ministry 
when they get here. Hagrid, please tell the Heads of 
Houses — Slughorn can represent Slytherin — that I 
want to see them in my office forthwith. I would like 
you to join us too.” 

As Hagrid nodded, turned, and shuffled out of the 
room again, she looked down at Harry. “Before I meet 



Page | 701 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




them I would like a quick word with you, Harry. If 
you’ll come with me. ...” 

Harry stood up, murmured “See you in a bit” to Ron, 
Hermione, and Ginny, and followed Professor 
McGonagall back down the ward. The corridors 
outside were deserted and the only sound was the 
distant phoenix song. It was several minutes before 
Harry became aware that they were not heading for 
Professor McGonagall’s office, but for Dumbledore’s, 
and another few seconds before he realized that of 
course, she had been deputy headmistress. ... 
Apparently she was now headmistress ... so the room 
behind the gargoyle was now hers. 

In silence they ascended the moving spiral staircase 
and entered the circular office. He did not know what 
he had expected: that the room would be draped in 
black, perhaps, or even that Dumbledore’s body 
might be lying there. In fact, it looked almost exactly 
as it had done when he and Dumbledore had left it 
mere hours previously: the silver instruments 
whirring and puffing on their spindle-legged tables, 
Gryffindor’s sword in its glass case gleaming in the 
moonlight, the Sorting Hat on a shelf behind the 
desk. But Fawkes’s perch stood empty, he was still 
crying his lament to the grounds. And a new portrait 
had joined the ranks of the dead headmasters and 
headmistresses of Hogwarts: Dumbledore was 
slumbering in a golden frame over the desk, his half- 
moon spectacles perched upon his crooked nose, 
looking peaceful and untroubled. 

After glancing once at this portrait, Professor 
McGonagall made an odd movement as though 
steeling herself, then rounded the desk to look at 
Harry, her face taut and lined. 



Page | 702 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Harry,” she said, “I would like to know what you and 
Professor Dumbledore were doing this evening when 
you left the school.” 

“I can’t tell you that, Professor,” said Harry. He had 
expected the question and had his answer ready. It 
had been here, in this very room, that Dumbledore 
had told him that he was to confide the contents of 
their lessons to nobody but Ron and Hermione. 

“Harry, it might be important,” said Professor 
McGonagall. 

“It is,” said Harry, “very, but he didn’t want me to tell 
anyone.” 

Professor McGonagall glared at him. “Potter” — Harry 
registered the renewed use of his surname — “in the 
light of Professor Dumbledore’s death, I think you 
must see that the situation has changed somewhat — 



“I don’t think so,” said Harry, shrugging. “Professor 
Dumbledore never told me to stop following his orders 
if he died.” 

“But — ” 

“There’s one thing you should know before the 
Ministry gets here, though. Madam Rosmerta’s under 
the Imperius Curse, she was helping Malfoy and the 
Death Eaters, that’s how the necklace and the 
poisoned mead — ” 

“Rosmerta?” said Professor McGonagall incredulously, 
but before she could go on, there was a knock on the 
door behind them and Professors Sprout, Flitwick, 
and Slughorn traipsed into the room, followed by 



Page | 703 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid, who was still weeping copiously, his huge 
frame trembling with grief. 

“Snape!” ejaculated Slughorn, who looked the most 
shaken, pale and sweating. “Snape! I taught him! I 
thought I knew him!” 

But before any of them could respond to this, a sharp 
voice spoke from high on the wall: A sallow-faced 
wizard with a short black fringe had just walked back 
into his empty canvas. 

“Minerva, the Minister will be here within seconds, he 
has just Disapparated from the Ministry.” 

“Thank you, Everard,” said Professor McGonagall, 
and she turned quickly to her teachers. 

“I want to talk about what happens to Hogwarts 
before he gets here,” she said quickly. “Personally, I 
am not convinced that the school should reopen next 
year. The death of the headmaster at the hands of one 
of our colleagues is a terrible stain upon Hogwarts ’s 
history. It is horrible.” 

“I am sure Dumbledore would have wanted the school 
to remain open,” said Professor Sprout. “I feel that if a 
single pupil wants to come, then the school ought to 
remain open for that pupil.” 

“But will we have a single pupil after this?” said 
Slughorn, now dabbing his sweating brow with a 
silken handkerchief. “Parents will want to keep their 
children at home and I can’t say I blame them. 
Personally, I don’t think we’re in more danger at 
Hogwarts than we are anywhere else, but you can’t 
expect mothers to think like that. They’ll want to keep 
their families together, it’s only natural.” 



Page | 704 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I agree,” said Professor McGonagall. “And in any 
case, it is not true to say that Dumbledore never 
envisaged a situation in which Hogwarts might close. 
When the Chamber of Secrets reopened he considered 
the closure of the school — and I must say that 
Professor Dumbledore’s murder is more disturbing to 
me than the idea of Slytherin’s monster living 
undetected in the bowels of the castle. ...” 

“We must consult the governors,” said Professor 
Flitwick in his squeaky little voice; he had a large 
bruise on his forehead but seemed otherwise 
unscathed by his collapse in Snape’s office. “We must 
follow the established procedures. A decision should 
not be made hastily.” 

“Hagrid, you haven’t said anything,” said Professor 
McGonagall. “What are your views, ought Hogwarts to 
remain open?” 

Hagrid, who had been weeping silently into his large, 
spotted handkerchief throughout this conversation, 
now raised puffy red eyes and croaked, “I dunno, 
Professor ... that’s fer the Heads of House an’ the 
headmistress ter decide ...” 

“Professor Dumbledore always valued your views,” 
said Professor McGonagall kindly, “and so do I.” 

“Well, I’m stayin’,” said Hagrid, fat tears still leaking 
out of the corners of his eyes and trickling down into 
his tangled beard. “It’s me home, it’s bin me home 
since I was thirteen. An’ if there’s kids who wan’ me 
ter teach ’em, I’ll do it. But ... I dunno ... Hogwarts 
without Dumbledore ...” He gulped and disappeared 
behind his handkerchief once more, and there was 
silence. 



Page | 705 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“Very well,” said Professor McGonagall, glancing out 
of the window at the grounds, checking to see 
whether the Minister was yet approaching, “then I 
must agree with Filius that the right thing to do is to 
consult the governors, who will make the final 
decision. 

“Now, as to getting students home ... there is an 
argument for doing it sooner rather than later. We 
could arrange for the Hogwarts Express to come 
tomorrow if necessary — ” 

“What about Dumbledore’s funeral?” said Harry, 
speaking at last. 

“Well ...” said Professor McGonagall, losing a little of 
her briskness as her voice shook. “I — I know that it 
was Dumbledore’s wish to be laid to rest here, at 
Hogwarts — ” 

“Then that’s what’ll happen, isn’t it?” said Harry 
fiercely. 

“If the Ministry thinks it appropriate,” said Professor 
McGonagall. “No other headmaster or headmistress 
has ever been — ” 

“No other headmaster or headmistress ever gave more 
to this school,” growled Hagrid. 

“Hogwarts should be Dumbledore’s final resting 
place,” said Professor Flitwick. 

“Absolutely,” said Professor Sprout. 

“And in that case,” said Harry, “you shouldn’t send 
the students home until the funeral’s over. They’ll 
want to say — ” 



Page | 706 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




The last word caught in his throat, but Professor 
Sprout completed the sentence for him. 



“Good-bye.” 

“Well said,” squeaked Professor Flitwick. “Well said 
indeed! Our students should pay tribute, it is fitting. 
We can arrange transport home afterward.” 

“Seconded,” barked Professor Sprout. 

“I suppose ... yes ...” said Slughorn in a rather 
agitated voice, while Hagrid let out a strangled sob of 
assent. 

“He’s coming,” said Professor McGonagall suddenly, 
gazing down into the grounds. “The Minister ... and 
by the looks of it, he’s brought a delegation ...” 

“Can I leave, Professor?” said Harry at once. 

He had no desire at all to see, or be interrogated by, 
Rufus Scrimgeour tonight. 

“You may,” said Professor McGonagall. “And quickly.” 

She strode toward the door and held it open for him. 
He sped down the spiral staircase and off along the 
deserted corridor; he had left his Invisibility Cloak at 
the top of the Astronomy Tower, but it did not matter; 
there was nobody in the corridors to see him pass, 
not even Filch, Mrs. Norris, or Peeves. He did not 
meet another soul until he turned into the passage 
leading to the Gryffindor common room. 

“Is it true?” whispered the Fat Lady as he approached 
her. “It is really true? Dumbledore — dead?” 

“Yes,” said Harry. 

Page | 707 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




She let out a wail and, without waiting for the 
password, swung forward to admit him. 



As Harry had suspected it would be, the common 
room was jam-packed. The room fell silent as he 
climbed through the portrait hole. He saw Dean and 
Seamus sitting in a group nearby: This meant that 
the dormitory must be empty, or nearly so. Without 
speaking to anybody, without making eye contact at 
all, Harry walked straight across the room and 
through the door to the boys’ dormitories. 

As he had hoped, Ron was waiting for him, still fully 
dressed, sitting on his bed. Harry sat down on his 
own four-poster and for a moment, they simply stared 
at each other. 

“They’re talking about closing the school,” said Harry. 
“Lupin said they would,” said Ron. 

There was a pause. 

“So?” said Ron in a very low voice, as though he 
thought the furniture might be listening in. “Did you 
find one? Did you get it? A — a Horcrux?” 

Harry shook his head. All that had taken place 
around that black lake seemed like an old nightmare 
now; had it really happened, and only hours ago? 

“You didn’t get it?” said Ron, looking crestfallen. “It 
wasn’t there?” 

“No,” said Harry. “Someone had already taken it and 
left a fake in its place.” 

“Already taken — ?” 

Page | 708 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Wordlessly, Harry pulled the fake locket from his 
pocket, opened it, and passed it to Ron. The full story 
could wait. ... It did not matter tonight ... nothing 
mattered except the end, the end of their pointless 
adventure, the end of Dumbledore’s life. ... 

“R.A.B.,” whispered Ron, “but who was that?” 

“Dunno,” said Harry, lying back on his bed fully 
clothed and staring blankly upwards. He felt no 
curiosity at all about R.A.B.: He doubted that he 
would ever feel curious again. As he lay there, he 
became aware suddenly that the grounds were silent. 
Fawkes had stopped singing. 

And he knew, without knowing how he knew it, that 
the phoenix had gone, had left Hogwarts for good, just 
as Dumbledore had left the school, had left the world 
. . . had left Harry. 



Page | 709 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 






THE WHITE TOMB 

All lessons were suspended, all examinations 
postponed. Some students were hurried away from 
Hogwarts by their parents over the next couple of 
days — the Patil twins were gone before breakfast on 
the morning following Dumbledore’s death, and 
Zacharias Smith was escorted from the castle by his 
haughty-looking father. Seamus Finnigan, on the 
other hand, refused point-blank to accompany his 
mother home; they had a shouting match in the 
entrance hall that was resolved when she agreed that 
he could remain behind for the funeral. She had 
difficulty in finding a bed in Hogsmeade, Seamus told 
Harry and Ron, for wizards and witches were pouring 
into the village, preparing to pay their last respects to 
Dumbledore. 

Some excitement was caused among the younger 
students, who had never seen it before, when a 
powder-blue carriage the size of a house, pulled by a 
dozen giant winged palominos, came soaring out of 
the sky in the late afternoon before the funeral and 



Page | 710 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 



landed on the edge of the forest. Harry watched from 
a window as a gigantic and handsome olive-skinned, 
black-haired woman descended the carriage steps 
and threw herself into the waiting Hagrid’s arms. 
Meanwhile a delegation of Ministry officials, including 
the Minister of Magic himself, was being 
accommodated within the castle. Harry was diligently 
avoiding contact with any of them; he was sure that, 
sooner or later, he would be asked again to account 
for Dumbledore’s last excursion from Hogwarts. 

Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Ginny were spending all 
of their time together. The beautiful weather seemed 
to mock them; Harry could imagine how it would have 
been if Dumbledore had not died, and they had had 
this time together at the very end of the year, Ginny’s 
examinations finished, the pressure of homework 
lifted . . . and hour by hour, he put off saying the thing 
that he knew he must say, doing what he knew was 
right to do, because it was too hard to forgo his best 
source of comfort. 

They visited the hospital wing twice a day: Neville had 
been discharged, but Bill remained under Madam 
Pomfrey’s care. His scars were as bad as ever — in 
truth, he now bore a distinct resemblance to Mad-Eye 
Moody, though thankfully with both eyes and legs — 
but in personality he seemed just the same as ever. 

All that appeared to have changed was that he now 
had a great liking for very rare steaks. 

"... so eet ees lucky ’e is marrying me,” said Fleur 
happily, plumping up Bill’s pillows, “because ze 
British overcook their meat, I ’ave always said this.” 

“I suppose I’m just going to have to accept that he 
really is going to marry her,” sighed Ginny later that 
evening, as she, Harry, Ron, and Hermione sat beside 



Page | 711 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




the open window of the Gryffindor common room, 
looking out over the twilit grounds. 

“She’s not that bad,” said Harry. “Ugly, though,” he 
added hastily, as Ginny raised her eyebrows, and she 
let out a reluctant giggle. 

“Well, I suppose if Mum can stand it, I can.” 

“Anyone else we know died?” Ron asked Hermione, 
who was perusing the Evening Prophet. 

Hermione winced at the forced toughness in his voice. 
“No,” she said reprovingly, folding up the newspaper. 
“They’re still looking for Snape but no sign ...” 

“Of course there isn’t,” said Harry, who became angry 
every time this subject cropped up. “They won’t find 
Snape till they find Voldemort, and seeing as they’ve 
never managed to do that in all this time ...” 

“I’m going to go to bed,” yawned Ginny. “I haven’t 
been sleeping that well since . . . well ... I could do with 
some sleep.” 

She kissed Harry (Ron looked away pointedly), waved 
at the other two, and departed for the girls’ 
dormitories. The moment the door had closed behind 
her, Hermione leaned forward toward Harry with a 
most Hermione-ish look on her face. 

“Harry, I found something out this morning, in the 
library.” 

“R.A.B.?” said Harry, sitting up straight. 

He did not feel the way he had so often felt before, 
excited, curious, burning to get to the bottom of a 
mystery; he simply knew that the task of discovering 

Page | 712 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




the truth about the real Horcrux had to be completed 
before he could move a little farther along the dark 
and winding path stretching ahead of him, the path 
that he and Dumbledore had set out upon together, 
and which he now knew he would have to journey 
alone. There might still be as many as four Horcruxes 
out there somewhere, and each would need to be 
found and eliminated before there was even a 
possibility that Voldemort could be killed. He kept 
reciting their names to himself, as though by listing 
them he could bring them within reach: the locket ... 
the cup . . . the snake . . . something of Gryffindor’s or 
Ravenclaw’s . . . the locket . . . the cup . . . the snake . . . 
something of Gryffindor’s or Ravenclaw’s ... 

This mantra seemed to pulse through Harry’s mind as 
he fell asleep at night, and his dreams were thick with 
cups, lockets, and mysterious objects that he could 
not quite reach, though Dumbledore helpfully offered 
Harry a rope ladder that turned to snakes the 
moment he began to climb. ... 

He had shown Hermione the note inside the locket 
the morning after Dumbledore ’s death, and although 
she had not immediately recognized the initials as 
belonging to some obscure wizard about whom she 
had been reading, she had since been rushing off to 
the library a little more often than was strictly 
necessary for somebody who had no homework to do. 

“No,” she said sadly, “I’ve been trying, Harry, but I 
haven’t found anything. ... There are a couple of 
reasonably well-known wizards with those initials — 
Rosalind Antigone Bungs . . . Rupert ‘Axebanger’ 
Brookstanton ... but they don’t seem to fit at all. 
Judging by that note, the person who stole the 
Horcrux knew Voldemort, and I can’t find a shred of 
evidence that Bungs or Axebanger ever had anything 



Page | 713 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




to do with him. ... No, actually, it’s about ... well, 
Snape.” 

She looked nervous even saying the name again. 

“What about him?” asked Harry heavily, slumping 
back in his chair. 

“Well, it’s just that I was sort of right about the Half- 
Blood Prince business,” she said tentatively. 

“D’you have to rub it in, Hermione? How d’you think I 
feel about that now?” 

“No — no — Harry, I didn’t mean that!” she said 
hastily, looking around to check that they were not 
being overheard. “It’s just that I was right about 
Eileen Prince once owning the book. You see ... she 
was Snape ’s mother!” 

“I thought she wasn’t much of a looker,” said Ron. 
Hermione ignored him. 

“I was going through the rest of the old Prophets and 
there was a tiny announcement about Eileen Prince 
marrying a man called Tobias Snape, and then later 
an announcement saying that she’d given birth to a 



“ — murderer,” spat Harry. 

“Well ... yes,” said Hermione. “So ... I was sort of 
right. Snape must have been proud of being ‘half a 
Prince,’ you see? Tobias Snape was a Muggle from 
what it said in the Prophet” 

“Yeah, that fits,” said Harry. “He’d play up the pure- 
blood side so he could get in with Lucius Malfoy and 
the rest of them. ... He’s just like Voldemort. Pure- 

Page | 714 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




blood mother, Muggle father . . . ashamed of his 
parentage, trying to make himself feared using the 
Dark Arts, gave himself an impressive new name — 
Lord Voldemort — the Half-Blood Prince — how could 
Dumbledore have missed — ?” 

He broke off, looking out the window. He could not 
stop himself dwelling upon Dumbledore ’s inexcusable 
trust in Snape ... but as Hermione had just 
inadvertently reminded him, he, Harry, had been 
taken in just the same. ... In spite of the increasing 
nastiness of those scribbled spells, he had refused to 
believe ill of the boy who had been so clever, who had 
helped him so much. ... 

Helped him ... it was an almost unendurable thought 
now. 

“I still don’t get why he didn’t turn you in for using 
that book,” said Ron. “He must’ve known where you 
were getting it all from.” 

“He knew,” said Harry bitterly. “He knew when I used 
Sectumsempra. He didn’t really need Legilimency. ... 
He might even have known before then, with 
Slughorn talking about how brilliant I was at Potions. 
... Shouldn’t have left his old book in the bottom of 
that cupboard, should he?” 

“But why didn’t he turn you in?” 

“I don’t think he wanted to associate himself with that 
book,” said Hermione. “I don’t think Dumbledore 
would have liked it very much if he’d known. And 
even if Snape pretended it hadn’t been his, Slughorn 
would have recognized his writing at once. Anyway, 
the book was left in Snape’s old classroom, and I’ll bet 
Dumbledore knew his mother was called ‘Prince.’ ” 



Page | 715 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“I should’ve shown the book to Dumbledore,” said 
Harry. “All that time he was showing me how 
Voldemort was evil even when he was at school, and I 
had proof Snape was too — ” 

“ ‘Evil’ is a strong word,” said Hermione quietly. 

“You were the one who kept telling me the book was 
dangerous!” 

“I’m trying to say, Harry, that you’re putting too much 
blame on yourself. I thought the Prince seemed to 
have a nasty sense of humor, but I would never have 
guessed he was a potential killer. ...” 

“None of us could’ve guessed Snape would ... you 
know,” said Ron. 

Silence fell between them, each of them lost in their 
own thoughts, but Harry was sure that they, like him, 
were thinking about the following morning, when 
Dumbledore’s body would be laid to rest. He had 
never attended a funeral before; there had been no 
body to bury when Sirius had died. He did not know 
what to expect and was a little worried about what he 
might see, about how he would feel. He wondered 
whether Dumbledore’s death would be more real to 
him once it was over. Though he had moments when 
the horrible fact of it threatened to overwhelm him, 
there were blank stretches of numbness where, 
despite the fact that nobody was talking about 
anything else in the whole castle, he still found it 
difficult to believe that Dumbledore had really gone. 
Admittedly he had not, as he had with Sirius, looked 
desperately for some kind of loophole, some way that 
Dumbledore would come back. . . . He felt in his pocket 
for the cold chain of the fake Horcrux, which he now 
carried with him everywhere, not as a talisman, but 



Page | 716 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




as a reminder of what it had cost and what remained 
still to do. 

Harry rose early to pack the next day; the Hogwarts 
Express would be leaving an hour after the funeral. 
Downstairs, he found the mood in the Great Hall 
subdued. Everybody was wearing their dress robes 
and no one seemed very hungry. Professor 
McGonagall had left the thronelike chair in the middle 
of the staff table empty. Hagrid’s chair was deserted 
too; Harry thought that perhaps he had not been able 
to face breakfast, but Snape’s place had been 
unceremoniously filled by Rufus Scrimgeour. Harry 
avoided his yellowish eyes as they scanned the Hall; 
Harry had the uncomfortable feeling that Scrimgeour 
was looking for him. Among Scrimgeour’s entourage 
Harry spotted the red hair and horn-rimmed glasses 
of Percy Weasley. Ron gave no sign that he was aware 
of Percy, apart from stabbing pieces of kipper with 
unwonted venom. 

Over at the Slytherin table Crabbe and Goyle were 
muttering together. Hulking boys though they were, 
they looked oddly lonely without the tall, pale figure of 
Malfoy between them, bossing them around. Harry 
had not spared Malfoy much thought. His animosity 
was all for Snape, but he had not forgotten the fear in 
Malfoy’s voice on that tower top, nor the fact that he 
had lowered his wand before the other Death Eaters 
arrived. Harry did not believe that Malfoy would have 
killed Dumbledore. He despised Malfoy still for his 
infatuation with the Dark Arts, but now the tiniest 
drop of pity mingled with his dislike. Where, Harry 
wondered, was Malfoy now, and what was Voldemort 
making him do under threat of killing him and his 
parents? 

Harry’s thoughts were interrupted by a nudge in the 
ribs from Ginny. Professor McGonagall had risen to 

Page | 717 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




her feet, and the mournful hum in the Hall died away 
at once. 

“It is nearly time,” she said. “Please follow your Heads 
of Houses out into the grounds. Gryffindors, after 
me.” 

They filed out from behind their benches in near 
silence. Harry glimpsed Slughorn at the head of the 
Slytherin column, wearing magnificent, long, emerald 
green robes embroidered with silver. He had never 
seen Professor Sprout, Head of the Hufflepuffs, 
looking so clean; there was not a single patch on her 
hat, and when they reached the entrance hall, they 
found Madam Pince standing beside Filch, she in a 
thick black veil that fell to her knees, he in an ancient 
black suit and tie reeking of mothballs. 

They were heading, as Harry saw when he stepped 
out onto the stone steps from the front doors, toward 
the lake. The warmth of the sun caressed his face as 
they followed Professor McGonagall in silence to the 
place where hundreds of chairs had been set out in 
rows. An aisle ran down the center of them: There 
was a marble table standing at the front, all chairs 
facing it. It was the most beautiful summer’s day. 

An extraordinary assortment of people had already 
settled into half of the chairs; shabby and smart, old 
and young. Most Harry did not recognize, but a few 
he did, including members of the Order of the 
Phoenix: Kingsley Shacklebolt; Mad-Eye Moody; 
Tonks, her hair miraculously returned to vividest 
pink; Remus Lupin, with whom she seemed to be 
holding hands; Mr. and Mrs. Weasley; Bill supported 
by Fleur and followed by Fred and George, who were 
wearing jackets of black dragon skin. Then there was 
Madame Maxime, who took up two and a half chairs 
on her own; Tom, the landlord of the Leaky Cauldron 
Page | 718 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




in London; Arabella Figg, Harry’s Squib neighbor; the 
hairy bass player from the Wizarding group the Weird 
Sisters; Ernie Prang, driver of the Knight Bus; Madam 
Malkin, of the robe shop in Diagon Alley; and some 
people whom Harry merely knew by sight, such as the 
barman of the Hog’s Head and the witch who pushed 
the trolley on the Hogwarts Express. The castle ghosts 
were there too, barely visible in the bright sunlight, 
discernible only when they moved, shimmering 
insubstantially on the gleaming air. 

Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Ginny filed into seats at 
the end of a row beside the lake. People were 
whispering to each other; it sounded like a breeze in 
the grass, but the birdsong was louder by far. The 
crowd continued to swell; with a great rush of 
affection for both of them, Harry saw Neville being 
helped into a seat by Luna. Neville and Luna alone of 
the D.A. had responded to Hermione ’s summons the 
night that Dumbledore had died, and Harry knew 
why: They were the ones who had missed the D.A. 
most . . . probably the ones who had checked their 
coins regularly in the hope that there would be 
another meeting. 

Cornelius Fudge walked past toward the front rows, 
his expression miserable, twirling his green bowler 
hat as usual; Harry next recognized Rita Skeeter, 
who, he was infuriated to see, had a notebook 
clutched in her red-taloned hand, and then, with a 
worse jolt of fury, Dolores Umbridge, an unconvincing 
expression of grief upon her toadlike face, a black 
velvet bow set atop her iron-colored curls. At the sight 
of the centaur Firenze, who was standing like a 
sentinel near the water’s edge, she gave a start and 
scurried hastily into a seat a good distance away. 

The staff was seated at last. Harry could see 
Scrimgeour looking grave and dignified in the front 

Page | 719 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




row with Professor McGonagall. He wondered whether 
Scrimgeour or any of these important people were 
really sorry that Dumbledore was dead. But then he 
heard music, strange, otherworldly music, and he 
forgot his dislike of the Ministry in looking around for 
the source of it. He was not the only one: Many heads 
were turning, searching, a little alarmed. 

“In there,” whispered Ginny in Harry’s ear. 

And he saw them in the clear green sunlit water, 
inches below the surface, reminding him horribly of 
the Inferi: a chorus of merpeople singing in a strange 
language he did not understand, their pallid faces 
rippling, their purplish hair flowing all around them. 
The music made the hair on Harry’s neck stand up, 
and yet it was not unpleasant. It spoke very clearly of 
loss and of despair. As he looked down into the wild 
faces of the singers, he had the feeling that they, at 
least, were sorry for Dumbledore’s passing. Then 
Ginny nudged him again and he looked around. 

Hagrid was walking slowly up the aisle between the 
chairs. He was crying quite silently, his face gleaming 
with tears, and in his arms, wrapped in purple velvet 
spangled with golden stars, was what Harry knew to 
be Dumbledore’s body. A sharp pain rose in Harry’s 
throat at this sight: For a moment, the strange music 
and the knowledge that Dumbledore’s body was so 
close seemed to take all warmth from the day. Ron 
looked white and shocked. Tears were falling thick 
and fast into both Ginny ’s and Hermione’s laps. 

They could not see clearly what was happening at the 
front. Hagrid seemed to have placed the body 
carefully upon the table. Now he retreated down the 
aisle, blowing his nose with loud trumpeting noises 
that drew scandalized looks from some, including, 
Harry saw, Dolores Umbridge ... but Harry knew that 
Page | 720 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore would not have cared. He tried to make a 
friendly gesture to Hagrid as he passed, but Hagrid’s 
eyes were so swollen it was a wonder he could see 
where he was going. Harry glanced at the back row to 
which Hagrid was heading and realized what was 
guiding him, for there, dressed in a jacket and 
trousers each the size of a small marquee, was the 
giant Grawp, his great ugly boulderlike head bowed, 
docile, almost human. Hagrid sat down next to his 
half-brother, and Grawp patted Hagrid hard on the 
head, so that his chair legs sank into the ground. 
Harry had a wonderful momentary urge to laugh. But 
then the music stopped, and he turned to face the 
front again. 

A little tufty-haired man in plain black robes had got 
to his feet and stood now in front of Dumbledore ’s 
body. Harry could not hear what he was saying. Odd 
words floated back to them over the hundreds of 
heads. “Nobility of spirit” ... “intellectual contribution” 
... “greatness of heart” ... It did not mean very much. 

It had little to do with Dumbledore as Harry had 
known him. He suddenly remembered Dumbledore ’s 
idea of a few words, “nitwit,” “oddment,” “blubber,” 
and “tweak,” and again had to suppress a grin. ... 
What was the matter with him? 

There was a soft splashing noise to his left and he 
saw that the merpeople had broken the surface to 
listen too. He remembered Dumbledore crouching at 
the water’s edge two years ago, very close to where 
Harry now sat, and conversing in Mermish with the 
Merchieftainess. Harry wondered where Dumbledore 
had learned Mermish. There was so much he had 
never asked him, so much he should have said. ... 

And then, without warning, it swept over him, the 
dreadful truth, more completely and undeniably than 
it had until now. Dumbledore was dead, gone. ... He 

Page | 721 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




clutched the cold locket in his hand so tightly that it 
hurt, but he could not prevent hot tears spilling from 
his eyes: He looked away from Ginny and the others 
and stared out over the lake, toward the forest, as the 
little man in black droned on. ... There was movement 
among the trees. The centaurs had come to pay their 
respects too. They did not move into the open but 
Harry saw them standing quite still, half hidden in 
shadow, watching the wizards, their bows hanging at 
their sides. And Harry remembered his first 
nightmarish trip into the forest, the first time he had 
ever encountered the thing that was then Voldemort, 
and how he had faced him, and how he and 
Dumbledore had discussed fighting a losing battle not 
long thereafter. It was important, Dumbledore said, to 
fight, and fight again, and keep fighting, for only then 
could evil be kept at bay, though never quite 
eradicated. ... 

And Harry saw very clearly as he sat there under the 
hot sun how people who cared about him had stood 
in front of him one by one, his mother, his father, his 
godfather, and finally Dumbledore, all determined to 
protect him; but now that was over. He could not let 
anybody else stand between him and Voldemort; he 
must abandon forever the illusion he ought to have 
lost at the age of one, that the shelter of a parent’s 
arms meant that nothing could hurt him. There was 
no waking from his nightmare, no comforting whisper 
in the dark that he was safe really, that it was all in 
his imagination; the last and greatest of his protectors 
had died, and he was more alone than he had ever 
been before. 

The little man in black had stopped speaking at last 
and resumed his seat. Harry waited for somebody else 
to get to their feet; he expected speeches, probably 
from the Minister, but nobody moved. 



Page | 722 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Then several people screamed. Bright, white flames 
had erupted around Dumbledore’s body and the table 
upon which it lay: Higher and higher they rose, 
obscuring the body. White smoke spiraled into the air 
and made strange shapes: Harry thought, for one 
heart- stopping moment, that he saw a phoenix fly 
joyfully into the blue, but next second the fire had 
vanished. In its place was a white marble tomb, 
encasing Dumbledore’s body and the table on which 
he had rested. 

There were a few more cries of shock as a shower of 
arrows soared through the air, but they fell far short 
of the crowd. It was, Harry knew, the centaurs’ 
tribute: He saw them turn tail and disappear back 
into the cool trees. Likewise, the merpeople sank 
slowly back into the green water and were lost from 
view. 

Harry looked at Ginny, Ron, and Hermione: Ron’s 
face was screwed up as though the sunlight were 
blinding him. Hermione ’s face was glazed with tears, 
but Ginny was no longer crying. She met Harry’s gaze 
with the same hard, blazing look that he had seen 
when she had hugged him after winning the 
Quidditch Cup in his absence, and he knew that at 
that moment they understood each other perfectly, 
and that when he told her what he was going to do 
now, she would not say, “Be careful,” or “Don’t do it,” 
but accept his decision, because she would not have 
expected anything less of him. And so he steeled 
himself to say what he had known he must say ever 
since Dumbledore had died. 

“Ginny, listen ...” he said very quietly, as the buzz of 
conversation grew louder around them and people 
began to get to their feet, “I can’t be involved with you 
anymore. We’ve got to stop seeing each other. We 
can’t be together.” 

Page | 723 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




She said, with an oddly twisted smile, “It’s for some 
stupid, noble reason, isn’t it?” 

“It’s been like ... like something out of someone else’s 
life, these last few weeks with you,” said Harry. “But I 
can’t ... we can’t ... I’ve got things to do alone now.” 

She did not cry, she simply looked at him. 

“Voldemort uses people his enemies are close to. He’s 
already used you as bait once, and that was just 
because you’re my best friend’s sister. Think how 
much danger you’ll be in if we keep this up. He’ll 
know, hell find out. He’ll try and get to me through 
you.” 

“What if I don’t care?” said Ginny fiercely. 

“I care,” said Harry. “How do you think I’d feel if this 
was your funeral ... and it was my fault. ...” 

She looked away from him, over the lake. 

“I never really gave up on you,” she said. “Not really. I 
always hoped. ... Hermione told me to get on with life, 
maybe go out with some other people, relax a bit 
around you, because I never used to be able to talk if 
you were in the room, remember? And she thought 
you might take a bit more notice if I was a bit more — 
myself.” 

“Smart girl, that Hermione,” said Harry, trying to 
smile. “I just wish I’d asked you sooner. We could’ve 
had ages ... months ... years maybe. ...” 

“But you’ve been too busy saving the Wizarding 
world,” said Ginny, half laughing. “Well ... I can’t say 
I’m surprised. I knew this would happen in the end. I 



Page | 724 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




knew you wouldn’t be happy unless you were hunting 
Voldemort. Maybe that’s why I like you so much.” 

Harry could not bear to hear these things, nor did he 
think his resolution would hold if he remained sitting 
beside her. Ron, he saw, was now holding Hermione 
and stroking her hair while she sobbed into his 
shoulder, tears dripping from the end of his own long 
nose. With a miserable gesture, Harry got up, turned 
his back on Ginny and on Dumbledore’s tomb, and 
walked away around the lake. Moving felt much more 
bearable than sitting still, just as setting out as soon 
as possible to track down the Horcruxes and kill 
Voldemort would feel better than waiting to do it. ... 

“Harry!” 

He turned. Rufus Scrimgeour was limping rapidly 
toward him around the bank, leaning on his walking 
stick. 

“I’ve been hoping to have a word ... do you mind if I 
walk a little way with you?” 

“No,” said Harry indifferently, and set off again. 

“Harry, this was a dreadful tragedy,” said Scrimgeour 
quietly. “I cannot tell you how appalled I was to hear 
of it. Dumbledore was a very great wizard. We had our 
disagreements, as you know, but no one knows better 
than I — ” 

“What do you want?” asked Harry flatly. 

Scrimgeour looked annoyed, but as before, hastily 
modified his expression to one of sorrowful 
understanding. 



Page | 725 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“You are, of course, devastated,” he said. “I know that 
you were very close to Dumbledore. I think you may 
have been his favorite pupil ever. The bond between 
the two of you — ” 

“What do you want?” Harry repeated, coming to a 
halt. 

Scrimgeour stopped too, leaned on his stick, and 
stared at Harry, his expression shrewd now. 

“The word is that you were with him when he left the 
school the night that he died.” 

“Whose word?” said Harry. 

“Somebody Stupefied a Death Eater on top of the 
tower after Dumbledore died. There were also two 
broomsticks up there. The Ministry can add two and 
two, Harry.” 

“Glad to hear it,” said Harry. “Well, where I went with 
Dumbledore and what we did is my business. He 
didn’t want people to know.” 

“Such loyalty is admirable, of course,” said 
Scrimgeour, who seemed to be restraining his 
irritation with difficulty, “but Dumbledore is gone, 
Harry. He’s gone.” 

“He will only be gone from the school when none here 
are loyal to him,” said Harry, smiling in spite of 
himself. 

“My dear boy . . . even Dumbledore cannot return from 
the — ” 

“I am not saying he can. You wouldn’t understand. 

But I’ve got nothing to tell you.” 

Page | 726 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




Scrimgeour hesitated, then said, in what was 
evidently supposed to be a tone of delicacy, “The 
Ministry can offer you all sorts of protection, you 
know, Harry. I would be delighted to place a couple of 
my Aurors at your service — ” 

Harry laughed. “Voldemort wants to kill me himself, 
and Aurors won’t stop him. So thanks for the offer, 
but no thanks.” 

“So,” said Scrimgeour, his voice cold now, “the 
request I made of you at Christmas — ” 

“What request? Oh yeah . . . the one where I tell the 
world what a great job you’re doing in exchange for — ” 

“ — for raising everyone’s morale!” snapped 
Scrimgeour. 

Harry considered him for a moment. 

“Released Stan Shunpike yet?” 

Scrimgeour turned a nasty purple color highly 
reminiscent of Uncle Vernon. 

“I see you are — ” 

“Dumbledore’s man through and through,” said 
Harry. “That’s right.” 

Scrimgeour glared at him for another moment, then 
turned and limped away without another word. Harry 
could see Percy and the rest of the Ministry delegation 
waiting for him, casting nervous glances at the 
sobbing Hagrid and Grawp, who were still in their 
seats. Ron and Hermione were hurrying toward 
Harry, passing Scrimgeour going in the opposite 
direction. Harry turned and walked slowly on, waiting 
Page | 727 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




for them to catch up, which they finally did in the 
shade of a beech tree under which they had sat in 
happier times. 

“What did Scrimgeour want?” Hermione whispered. 

“Same as he wanted at Christmas,” shrugged Harry. 
“Wanted me to give him inside information on 
Dumbledore and be the Ministry’s new poster boy.” 

Ron seemed to struggle with himself for a moment, 
then he said loudly to Hermione, “Look, let me go 
back and hit Percy!” 

“No,” she said firmly, grabbing his arm. 

“It’ll make me feel better!” 

Harry laughed. Even Hermione grinned a little, 
though her smile faded as she looked up at the castle. 

“I can’t bear the idea that we might never come back,” 
she said softly. “How can Hogwarts close?” 

“Maybe it won’t,” said Ron. “We’re not in any more 
danger here than we are at home, are we? 
Everywhere’s the same now. I’d even say Hogwarts is 
safer, there are more wizards inside to defend the 
place. What d’you reckon, Harry?” 

“I’m not coming back even if it does reopen,” said 
Harry. 

Ron gaped at him, but Hermione said sadly, “I knew 
you were going to say that. But then what will you 
do?” 



Page | 728 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




‘Tm going back to the Dursleys’ once more, because 
Dumbledore wanted me to,” said Harry. “But it’ll be a 
short visit, and then I’ll be gone for good.” 

“But where will you go if you don’t come back to 
school?” 

“I thought I might go back to Godric’s Hollow,” Harry 
muttered. He had had the idea in his head ever since 
the night of Dumbledore’s death. “For me, it started 
there, all of it. I’ve just got a feeling I need to go there. 
And I can visit my parents’ graves, I’d like that.” 

“And then what?” said Ron. 

“Then I’ve got to track down the rest of the Horcruxes, 
haven’t I?” said Harry, his eyes upon Dumbledore’s 
white tomb, reflected in the water on the other side of 
the lake. “That’s what he wanted me to do, that’s why 
he told me all about them. If Dumbledore was right — 
and I’m sure he was — there are still four of them out 
there. I’ve got to find them and destroy them, and 
then I’ve got to go after the seventh bit of Voldemort’s 
soul, the bit that’s still in his body, and I’m the one 
who’s going to kill him. And if I meet Severus Snape 
along the way,” he added, “so much the better for me, 
so much the worse for him.” 

There was a long silence. The crowd had almost 
dispersed now, the stragglers giving the monumental 
figure of Grawp a wide berth as he cuddled Hagrid, 
whose howls of grief were still echoing across the 
water. 

“Well be there, Harry,” said Ron. 

“What?” 



Page | 729 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




“At your aunt and uncle’s house,” said Ron. “And 
then well go with you wherever you’re going.” 

“No — ” said Harry quickly; he had not counted on 
this, he had meant them to understand that he was 
undertaking this most dangerous journey alone. 

“You said to us once before,” said Hermione quietly, 
“that there was time to turn back if we wanted to. 
We’ve had time, haven’t we? 

“We’re with you whatever happens,” said Ron. “But 
mate, you’re going to have to come round my mum 
and dad’s house before we do anything else, even 
Godric’s Hollow.” 

“Why?” 

“Bill and Fleur’s wedding, remember?” 

Harry looked at him, startled; the idea that anything 
as normal as a wedding could still exist seemed 
incredible and yet wonderful. 

“Yeah, we shouldn’t miss that,” he said finally. 

His hand closed automatically around the fake 
Horcrux, but in spite of everything, in spite of the 
dark and twisting path he saw stretching ahead for 
himself, in spite of the final meeting with Voldemort 
he knew must come, whether in a month, in a year, 
or in ten, he felt his heart lift at the thought that 
there was still one last golden day of peace left to 
enjoy with Ron and Hermione. 



Page | 730 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling 




