/ 




OWL POST 

Harry Potter was a highly unusual boy in many ways. 
For one thing, he hated the summer holidays more 
than any other time of year. For another, he really 
wanted to do his homework but was forced to do it in 
secret, in the dead of night. And he also happened to 
be a wizard. 

It was nearly midnight, and he was lying on his 
stomach in bed, the blankets drawn right over his 
head like a tent, a flashlight in one hand and a large 
leather-bound book (A History of Magic by Bathilda 
Bagshot) propped open against the pillow. Harry 
moved the tip of his eagle-feather quill down the page, 
frowning as he looked for something that would help 
him write his essay, “Witch Burning in the Fourteenth 
Century Was Completely Pointless — discuss.” 

The quill paused at the top of a likely-looking 
paragraph. Harry pushed his round glasses up the 
bridge of his nose, moved his flashlight closer to the 
book, and read: 



Page | 2 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



Non-magic people (more commonly known as 
Muggles) were particularly afraid of magic in medieval 
times, but not very good at recognizing it. On the rare 
occasion that they did catch a real witch or wizard, 
burning had no effect whatsoever. The witch or wizard 
would perform a basic Flame Freezing Charm and 
then pretend to shriek with pain while enjoying a 
gentle, tickling sensation. Indeed, Wendelin the Weird 
enjoyed being burned so much that she allowed 
herself to be caught no less than forty-seven times in 
various disguises. 

Harry put his quill between his teeth and reached 
underneath his pillow for his ink bottle and a roll of 
parchment. Slowly and very carefully he unscrewed 
the ink bottle, dipped his quill into it, and began to 
write, pausing every now and then to listen, because 
if any of the Dursleys heard the scratching of his quill 
on their way to the bathroom, he’d probably find 
himself locked in the cupboard under the stairs for 
the rest of the summer. 

The Dursley family of number four, Privet Drive, was 
the reason that Harry never enjoyed his summer 
holidays. Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and their son, 
Dudley, were Harry’s only living relatives. They were 
Muggles, and they had a very medieval attitude 
toward magic. Harry’s dead parents, who had been a 
witch and wizard themselves, were never mentioned 
under the Dursleys’ roof. For years, Aunt Petunia and 
Uncle Vernon had hoped that if they kept Harry as 
downtrodden as possible, they would be able to 
squash the magic out of him. To their fury, they had 
been unsuccessful. These days they lived in terror of 
anyone finding out that Harry had spent most of the 
last two years at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and 
Wizardry. The most they could do, however, was to 
lock away Harry’s spellbooks, wand, cauldron, and 



Page | 3 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




broomstick at the start of the summer break, and 
forbid him to talk to the neighbors. 

This separation from his spellbooks had been a real 
problem for Harry, because his teachers at Hogwarts 
had given him a lot of holiday work. One of the 
essays, a particularly nasty one about shrinking 
potions, was for Harry’s least favorite teacher, 
Professor Snape, who would be delighted to have an 
excuse to give Harry detention for a month. Harry had 
therefore seized his chance in the first week of the 
holidays. While Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and 
Dudley had gone out into the front garden to admire 
Uncle Vernon’s new company car (in very loud voices, 
so that the rest of the street would notice it too), 

Harry had crept downstairs, picked the lock on the 
cupboard under the stairs, grabbed some of his 
books, and hidden them in his bedroom. As long as 
he didn’t leave spots of ink on the sheets, the 
Dursleys need never know that he was studying 
magic by night. 

Harry was particularly keen to avoid trouble with his 
aunt and uncle at the moment, as they were already 
in an especially bad mood with him, all because he’d 
received a telephone call from a fellow wizard one 
week into the school vacation. 

Ron Weasley, who was one of Harry’s best friends at 
Hogwarts, came from a whole family of wizards. This 
meant that he knew a lot of things Harry didn’t, but 
had never used a telephone before. Most unluckily it 
had been Uncle Vernon who had answered the call. 

“Vernon Dursley speaking.” 

Harry, who happened to be in the room at the time, 
froze as he heard Ron’s voice answer. 



Page | 4 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“HELLO? HELLO? CAN YOU HEAR ME? I — WANT — 
TO — TALK — TO — HARRY — POTTER!” 

Ron was yelling so loudly that Uncle Vernon jumped 
and held the receiver a foot away from his ear, staring 
at it with an expression of mingled fury and alarm. 

“WHO IS THIS?” he roared in the direction of the 
mouthpiece. “WHO ARE YOU?” 

“RON — WEASLEY!” Ron bellowed back, as though he 
and Uncle Vernon were speaking from opposite ends 
of a football field. “I’M — A — FRIEND — OF — 
HARRY’S — FROM — SCHOOL — ” 

Uncle Vernon’s small eyes swiveled around to Harry, 
who was rooted to the spot. 

“THERE IS NO HARRY POTTER HERE!” he roared, 
now holding the receiver at arm’s length, as though 
frightened it might explode. “I DONT KNOW WHAT 
SCHOOL YOU’RE TALKING ABOUT! NEVER 
CONTACT ME AGAIN! DONT YOU COME NEAR MY 
FAMILY!” 

And he threw the receiver back onto the telephone as 
if dropping a poisonous spider. 

The fight that had followed had been one of the worst 
ever. 

“HOW DARE YOU GIVE THIS NUMBER TO PEOPLE 
LIKE — PEOPLE LIKE YOU!” Uncle Vernon had 
roared, spraying Harry with spit. 

Ron obviously realized that he’d gotten Harry into 
trouble, because he hadn’t called again. Harry’s other 
best friend from Hogwarts, Hermione Granger, hadn’t 
been in touch either. Harry suspected that Ron had 

Page | 5 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




warned Hermione not to call, which was a pity, 
because Hermione, the cleverest witch in Harry’s 
year, had Muggle parents, knew perfectly well how to 
use a telephone, and would probably have had 
enough sense not to say that she went to Hogwarts. 

So Harry had had no word from any of his wizarding 
friends for five long weeks, and this summer was 
turning out to be almost as bad as the last one. There 
was just one very small improvement — after 
swearing that he wouldn’t use her to send letters to 
any of his friends, Harry had been allowed to let his 
owl, Hedwig, out at night. Uncle Vernon had given in 
because of the racket Hedwig made if she was locked 
in her cage all the time. 

Harry finished writing about Wendelin the Weird and 
paused to listen again. The silence in the dark house 
was broken only by the distant, grunting snores of his 
enormous cousin, Dudley. It must be very late, Harry 
thought. His eyes were itching with tiredness. 

Perhaps he’d finish this essay tomorrow night. ... 

He replaced the top of the ink bottle; pulled an old 
pillowcase from under his bed; put the flashlight, A 
History of Magic, his essay, quill, and ink inside it; got 
out of bed; and hid the lot under a loose floorboard 
under his bed. Then he stood up, stretched, and 
checked the time on the luminous alarm clock on his 
bedside table. 

It was one o’clock in the morning. Harry’s stomach 
gave a funny jolt. He had been thirteen years old, 
without realizing it, for a whole hour. 

Yet another unusual thing about Harry was how little 
he looked forward to his birthdays. He had never 
received a birthday card in his life. The Dursleys had 



Page | 6 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




completely ignored his last two birthdays, and he had 
no reason to suppose they would remember this one. 

Harry walked across the dark room, past Hedwig’s 
large, empty cage, to the open window. He leaned on 
the sill, the cool night air pleasant on his face after a 
long time under the blankets. Hedwig had been 
absent for two nights now. Harry wasn’t worried 
about her: she’d been gone this long before. But he 
hoped she’d be back soon — she was the only living 
creature in this house who didn’t flinch at the sight of 
him. 

Harry, though still rather small and skinny for his 
age, had grown a few inches over the last year. His 
jet-black hair, however, was just as it always had 
been — stubbornly untidy, whatever he did to it. The 
eyes behind his glasses were bright green, and on his 
forehead, clearly visible through his hair, was a thin 
scar, shaped like a bolt of lightning. 

Of all the unusual things about Harry, this scar was 
the most extraordinary of all. It was not, as the 
Dursleys had pretended for ten years, a souvenir of 
the car crash that had killed Harry’s parents, because 
Lily and James Potter had not died in a car crash. 
They had been murdered, murdered by the most 
feared Dark wizard for a hundred years, Lord 
Voldemort. Harry had escaped from the same attack 
with nothing more than a scar on his forehead, where 
Voldemort’s curse, instead of killing him, had 
rebounded upon its originator. Barely alive, 

Voldemort had fled. ... 

But Harry had come face-to-face with him at 
Hogwarts. Remembering their last meeting as he 
stood at the dark window, Harry had to admit he was 
lucky even to have reached his thirteenth birthday. 



Page | 7 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He scanned the starry sky for a sign of Hedwig, 
perhaps soaring back to him with a dead mouse 
dangling from her beak, expecting praise. Gazing 
absently over the rooftops, it was a few seconds before 
Harry realized what he was seeing. 

Silhouetted against the golden moon, and growing 
larger every moment, was a large, strangely lopsided 
creature, and it was flapping in Harry’s direction. He 
stood quite still, watching it sink lower and lower. For 
a split second he hesitated, his hand on the window 
latch, wondering whether to slam it shut. But then 
the bizarre creature soared over one of the street 
lamps of Privet Drive, and Harry, realizing what it 
was, leapt aside. 

Through the window soared three owls, two of them 
holding up the third, which appeared to be 
unconscious. They landed with a soft flump on 
Harry’s bed, and the middle owl, which was large and 
gray, keeled right over and lay motionless. There was 
a large package tied to its legs. 

Harry recognized the unconscious owl at once — his 
name was Errol, and he belonged to the Weasley 
family. Harry dashed to the bed, untied the cords 
around Errol’s legs, took off the parcel, and then 
carried Errol to Hedwig’s cage. Errol opened one 
bleary eye, gave a feeble hoot of thanks, and began to 
gulp some water. 

Harry turned back to the remaining owls. One of 
them, the large snowy female, was his own Hedwig. 
She, too, was carrying a parcel and looked extremely 
pleased with herself. She gave Harry an affectionate 
nip with her beak as he removed her burden, then 
flew across the room to join Errol. 



Page | 8 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry didn’t recognize the third owl, a handsome 
tawny one, but he knew at once where it had come 
from, because in addition to a third package, it was 
carrying a letter bearing the Hogwarts crest. When 
Harry relieved this owl of its burden, it ruffled its 
feathers importantly, stretched its wings, and took off 
through the window into the night. 

Harry sat down on his bed and grabbed Errol’s 
package, ripped off the brown paper, and discovered a 
present wrapped in gold, and his first ever birthday 
card. Fingers trembling slightly, he opened the 
envelope. Two pieces of paper fell out — a letter and a 
newspaper clipping. 

The clipping had clearly come out of the wizarding 
newspaper, the Daily Prophet, because the people in 
the black-and-white picture were moving. Harry 
picked up the clipping, smoothed it out, and read: 

MINISTRY OF MAGIC EMPLOYEE 

SCOOPS GRAND PRIZE 

Arthur Weasley, Head of the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts 
Office at the Ministry of Magic, has won the annual 
Daily Prophet Grand Prize Galleon Draw. 

A delighted Mr. Weasley told the Daily Prophet, “We 
will be spending the gold on a summer holiday in 
Egypt, where our eldest son, Bill, works as a curse 
breaker for Gringotts Wizarding Bank. ” 

The Weasley family will be spending a month in 
Egypt, returning for the start of the new school year 
at Hogwarts, which five of the Weasley children 
currently attend. 



Page | 9 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry scanned the moving photograph, and a grin 
spread across his face as he saw all nine of the 
Weasleys waving furiously at him, standing in front of 
a large pyramid. Plump little Mrs. Weasley; tall, 
balding Mr. Weasley; six sons; and one daughter, all 
(though the black-and-white picture didn’t show it) 
with flaming-red hair. Right in the middle of the 
picture was Ron, tall and gangling, with his pet rat, 
Scabbers, on his shoulder and his arm around his 
little sister, Ginny. 

Harry couldn’t think of anyone who deserved to win a 
large pile of gold more than the Weasleys, who were 
very nice and extremely poor. He picked up Ron’s 
letter and unfolded it. 

Dear Harry, 

Happy birthday! 

Look, I’m really sorry about that telephone call. I hope 
the Muggles didn’t give you a hard time. I asked Dad, 
and he reckons I shouldn’t have shouted. 

It’s amazing here in Egypt. Bill’s taken us around all 
the tombs and you wouldn’t believe the curses those 
old Egyptian wizards put on them. Mum wouldn’t let 
Ginny come in the last one. There were all these 
mutant skeletons in there, of Muggles who’d broken in 
and grown extra heads and stuff. 

I couldn’t believe it when Dad won the Daily Prophet 
Draw. Seven hundred galleons! Most of it’s gone on 
this trip, but they’re going to buy me a new wand for 
next year. 

Harry remembered only too well the occasion when 
Ron’s old wand had snapped. It had happened when 



Page | 10 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




the car the two of them had been flying to Hogwarts 
had crashed into a tree on the school grounds. 

We’ll be back about a week before term starts and 
we’ll be going up to London to get my wand and our 
new books. Any chance of meeting you there? 

Don’t let the Muggles get you down! 

Try and come to London, 

Ron 

PS. Percy’s Head Boy. He got the letter last week. 

Harry glanced back at the photograph. Percy, who 
was in his seventh and final year at Hogwarts, was 
looking particularly smug. He had pinned his Head 
Boy badge to the fez perched jauntily on top of his 
neat hair, his horn-rimmed glasses flashing in the 
Egyptian sun. 

Harry now turned to his present and unwrapped it. 
Inside was what looked like a miniature glass 
spinning top. There was another note from Ron 
beneath it. 

Harry — this is a Pocket Sneakoscope. If there’s 
someone untrustworthy around, it’s supposed to light 
up and spin. Bill says it’s rubbish sold for wizard 
tourists and isn’t reliable, because it kept lighting up at 
dinner last night. But he didn’t realize Fred and George 
had put beetles in his soup. 

Bye — 

Ron 



Page | 11 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry put the Pocket Sneakoscope on his bedside 
table, where it stood quite still, balanced on its point, 
reflecting the luminous hands of his clock. He looked 
at it happily for a few seconds, then picked up the 
parcel Hedwig had brought. 

Inside this, too, there was a wrapped present, a card, 
and a letter, this time from Hermione. 

Dear Harry, 

Ron wrote to me and told me about his phone call to 
your Uncle Vernon. I do hope you’re all right. 

I’m on holiday in France at the moment and I didn’t 
know how I was going to send this to you — what if 
they’d opened it at customs? — but then Hedwig 
turned up! I think she wanted to make sure you got 
something for your birthday for a change. I bought your 
present by owl-order; there was an advertisement in 
the Daily Prophet (I’ve been getting it delivered; it’s so 
good to keep up with what’s going on in the wizarding 
world). Did you see that picture of Ron and his family a 
week ago? I bet he’s learning loads. I’m really jealous 
— the ancient Egyptian wizards were fascinating. 

There’s some interesting local history of witchcraft 
here, too. I’ve rewritten my whole History of Magic 
essay to include some of the things I’ve found out. I 
hope it’s not too long — it’s two rolls of parchment more 
than Professor Binns asked for. 

Ron says he’s going to be in London in the last week of 
the holidays. Can you make it? Will your aunt and 
uncle let you come? I really hope you can. If not, I’ll see 
you on the Hogwarts Express on September first! 

Love from 



Page | 12 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione 



PS. Ron says Percy’s Head Boy. I’ll bet Percy’s really 
pleased. 

Ron doesn’t seem too happy about it. 

Harry laughed as he put Hermione ’s letter aside and 
picked up her present. It was very heavy. Knowing 
Hermione, he was sure it would be a large book full of 
very difficult spells — but it wasn’t. His heart gave a 
huge bound as he ripped back the paper and saw a 
sleek black leather case, with silver words stamped 
across it, reading Broomstick Servicing Kit. 

“Wow, Hermione!” Harry whispered, unzipping the 
case to look inside. 

There was a large jar of Fleetwood’s High-Finish 
Handle Polish, a pair of gleaming silver Tail-Twig 
Clippers, a tiny brass compass to clip on your broom 
for long journeys, and a Handbook of Do-It-Yourself 
Broomcare. 

Apart from his friends, the thing that Harry missed 
most about Hogwarts was Quidditch, the most 
popular sport in the magical world — highly 
dangerous, very exciting, and played on broomsticks. 
Harry happened to be a very good Quidditch player; 
he had been the youngest person in a century to be 
picked for one of the Hogwarts House teams. One of 
Harry’s most prized possessions was his Nimbus Two 
Thousand racing broom. 

Harry put the leather case aside and picked up his 
last parcel. He recognized the untidy scrawl on the 
brown paper at once: this was from Hagrid, the 
Hogwarts gamekeeper. He tore off the top layer of 
paper and glimpsed something green and leathery, 
Page | 13 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




but before he could unwrap it properly, the parcel 
gave a strange quiver, and whatever was inside it 
snapped loudly — as though it had jaws. 

Harry froze. He knew that Hagrid would never send 
him anything dangerous on purpose, but then, 

Hagrid didn’t have a normal person’s view of what 
was dangerous. Hagrid had been known to befriend 
giant spiders, buy vicious, three-headed dogs from 
men in pubs, and sneak illegal dragon eggs into his 
cabin. 

Harry poked the parcel nervously. It snapped loudly 
again. Harry reached for the lamp on his bedside 
table, gripped it firmly in one hand, and raised it over 
his head, ready to strike. Then he seized the rest of 
the wrapping paper in his other hand and pulled. 

And out fell — a book. Harry just had time to register 
its handsome green cover, emblazoned with the 
golden title The Monster Book of Monsters, before it 
flipped onto its edge and scuttled sideways along the 
bed like some weird crab. 

“Uh-oh,” Harry muttered. 

The book toppled off the bed with a loud clunk and 
shuffled rapidly across the room. Harry followed it 
stealthily. The book was hiding in the dark space 
under his desk. Praying that the Dursleys were still 
fast asleep, Harry got down on his hands and knees 
and reached toward it. 

“Ouch!” 

The book snapped shut on his hand and then flapped 
past him, still scuttling on its covers. Harry 
scrambled around, threw himself forward, and 



Page | 14 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




managed to flatten it. Uncle Vernon gave a loud, 
sleepy grunt in the room next door. 

Hedwig and Errol watched interestedly as Harry 
clamped the struggling book tightly in his arms, 
hurried to his chest of drawers, and pulled out a belt, 
which he buckled tightly around it. The Monster Book 
shuddered angrily, but could no longer flap and snap, 
so Harry threw it down on the bed and reached for 
Hagrid’s card. 

Dear Harry, 

Happy birthday! 

Think you might find this useful for next year. 

Won’t say no more here. Tell you when I see you. 

Hope the Muggles are treating you right. 

All the best, 

Hagrid 

It struck Harry as ominous that Hagrid thought a 
biting book would come in useful, but he put Hagrid’s 
card up next to Ron’s and Hermione’s, grinning more 
broadly than ever. Now there was only the letter from 
Hogwarts left. 

Noticing that it was rather thicker than usual, Harry 
slit open the envelope, pulled out the first page of 
parchment within, and read: 

Dear Mr. Potter, 

Please note that the new school year will begin on 
September the first. The Hogwarts Express will leave 

Page | 15 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




from King’s Cross station, platform nine and three- 
quarters, at eleven o’clock. 

Third years are permitted to visit the village of 
Hogsmeade on certain weekends. Please give the 
enclosed permission form to your parent or guardian to 
sign. 

A list of books for next year is enclosed. 

Yours sincerely, 

Professor M. McGonagall 
Deputy Headmistress 

Harry pulled out the Hogsmeade permission form and 
looked at it, no longer grinning. It would be wonderful 
to visit Hogsmeade on weekends; he knew it was an 
entirely wizarding village, and he had never set foot 
there. But how on earth was he going to persuade 
Uncle Vernon or Aunt Petunia to sign the form? 

He looked over at the alarm clock. It was now two 
o’clock in the morning. 

Deciding that he’d worry about the Hogsmeade form 
when he woke up, Harry got back into bed and 
reached up to cross off another day on the chart he’d 
made for himself, counting down the days left until 
his return to Hogwarts. Then he took off his glasses 
and lay down, eyes open, facing his three birthday 
cards. 

Extremely unusual though he was, at that moment 
Harry Potter felt just like everyone else — glad, for the 
first time in his life, that it was his birthday. 



Page | 16 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 





AUNT MARGE’S BIG MISTAKE 

Harry went down to breakfast the next morning to 
find the three Dursleys already sitting around the 
kitchen table. They were watching a brand-new 
television, a welcome-home-for-the-summer present 
for Dudley, who had been complaining loudly about 
the long walk between the fridge and the television in 
the living room. Dudley had spent most of the 
summer in the kitchen, his piggy little eyes fixed on 
the screen and his five chins wobbling as he ate 
continually. 

Harry sat down between Dudley and Uncle Vernon, a 
large, beefy man with very little neck and a lot of 
mustache. Far from wishing Harry a happy birthday, 
none of the Dursleys made any sign that they had 
noticed Harry enter the room, but Harry was far too 
used to this to care. He helped himself to a piece of 
toast and then looked up at the reporter on the 
television, who was halfway through a report on an 
escaped convict: 



Page | 17 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



"... The public is warned that Black is armed and 
extremely dangerous. A special hot line has been set 
up, and any sighting of Black should be reported 
immediately.” 

“No need to tell us he’s no good,” snorted Uncle 
Vernon, staring over the top of his newspaper at the 
prisoner. “Look at the state of him, the filthy 
layabout! Look at his hair!” 

He shot a nasty look sideways at Harry, whose untidy 
hair had always been a source of great annoyance to 
Uncle Vernon. Compared to the man on the 
television, however, whose gaunt face was 
surrounded by a matted, elbow-length tangle, Harry 
felt very well groomed indeed. 

The reporter had reappeared. 

“The Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries will 
announce today — ” 

“Hang on!” barked Uncle Vernon, staring furiously at 
the reporter. “You didn’t tell us where that maniac’s 
escaped from! What use is that? Lunatic could be 
coming up the street right now!” 

Aunt Petunia, who was bony and horse-faced, 
whipped around and peered intently out of the 
kitchen window. Harry knew Aunt Petunia would 
simply love to be the one to call the hot line number. 
She was the nosiest woman in the world and spent 
most of her life spying on the boring, law-abiding 
neighbors. 

“When will they learn,” said Uncle Vernon, pounding 
the table with his large purple fist, “that hanging’s the 
only way to deal with these people?” 



Page | 18 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Very true,” said Aunt Petunia, who was still 
squinting into next door’s runner beans. 

Uncle Vernon drained his teacup, glanced at his 
watch, and added, “I’d better be off in a minute, 
Petunia. Marge’s train gets in at ten.” 

Harry, whose thoughts had been upstairs with the 
Broomstick Servicing Kit, was brought back to earth 
with an unpleasant bump. 

“Aunt Marge?” he blurted out. “Sh — she’s not 
coming here, is she?” 

Aunt Marge was Uncle Vernon’s sister. Even though 
she was not a blood relative of Harry’s (whose mother 
had been Aunt Petunia’s sister), he had been forced to 
call her “Aunt” all his life. Aunt Marge lived in the 
country, in a house with a large garden, where she 
bred bulldogs. She didn’t often stay at Privet Drive, 
because she couldn’t bear to leave her precious dogs, 
but each of her visits stood out horribly vividly in 
Harry’s mind. 

At Dudley’s fifth birthday party, Aunt Marge had 
whacked Harry around the shins with her walking 
stick to stop him from beating Dudley at musical 
statues. A few years later, she had turned up at 
Christmas with a computerized robot for Dudley and 
a box of dog biscuits for Harry. On her last visit, the 
year before Harry started at Hogwarts, Harry had 
accidentally trodden on the tail of her favorite dog. 
Ripper had chased Harry out into the garden and up 
a tree, and Aunt Marge had refused to call him off 
until past midnight. The memory of this incident still 
brought tears of laughter to Dudley’s eyes. 

“Marge’ll be here for a week,” Uncle Vernon snarled, 
“and while we’re on the subject” — he pointed a fat 

Page | 19 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




finger threateningly at Harry — “we need to get a few 
things straight before I go and collect her.” 

Dudley smirked and withdrew his gaze from the 
television. Watching Harry being bullied by Uncle 
Vernon was Dudley’s favorite form of entertainment. 

“Firstly,” growled Uncle Vernon, “you’ll keep a civil 
tongue in your head when you’re talking to Marge.” 

“All right,” said Harry bitterly, “if she does when she’s 
talking to me.” 

“Secondly,” said Uncle Vernon, acting as though he 
had not heard Harry’s reply, “as Marge doesn’t know 
anything about your abnormality, I don’t want any — 
any funny stuff while she’s here. You behave yourself, 
got me?” 

“I will if she does,” said Harry through gritted teeth. 

“And thirdly,” said Uncle Vernon, his mean little eyes 
now slits in his great purple face, “we’ve told Marge 
you attend St. Brutus’s Secure Center for Incurably 
Criminal Boys.” 

“What?” Harry yelled. 

“And you’ll be sticking to that story, boy, or there’ll be 
trouble,” spat Uncle Vernon. 

Harry sat there, white-faced and furious, staring at 
Uncle Vernon, hardly able to believe it. Aunt Marge 
coming for a week-long visit — it was the worst 
birthday present the Dursleys had ever given him, 
including that pair of Uncle Vernon’s old socks. 



Page | 20 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, Petunia,” said Uncle Vernon, getting heavily to 
his feet, “111 be off to the station, then. Want to come 
along for the ride, Dudders?” 

“No,” said Dudley, whose attention had returned to 
the television now that Uncle Vernon had finished 
threatening Harry. 

“Duddy’s got to make himself smart for his auntie,” 
said Aunt Petunia, smoothing Dudley’s thick blond 
hair. “Mummy’s bought him a lovely new bow tie.” 

Uncle Vernon clapped Dudley on his porky shoulder. 

“See you in a bit, then,” he said, and he left the 
kitchen. 

Harry, who had been sitting in a kind of horrified 
trance, had a sudden idea. Abandoning his toast, he 
got quickly to his feet and followed Uncle Vernon to 
the front door. 

Uncle Vernon was pulling on his car coat. 

“I’m not taking you,” he snarled as he turned to see 
Harry watching him. 

“Like I wanted to come,” said Harry coldly. “I want to 
ask you something.” 

Uncle Vernon eyed him suspiciously. 

“Third years at Hog — at my school are allowed to 
visit the village sometimes,” said Harry. 

“So?” snapped Uncle Vernon, taking his car keys from 
a hook next to the door. 



Page | 21 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I need you to sign the permission form,” said Harry 
in a rush. 

“And why should I do that?” sneered Uncle Vernon. 

“Well,” said Harry, choosing his words carefully, “it’ll 
be hard work, pretending to Aunt Marge I go to that 
St. Whatsits — ” 

“St. Brutus’s Secure Center for Incurably Criminal 
Boys!” bellowed Uncle Vernon, and Harry was pleased 
to hear a definite note of panic in Uncle Vernon’s 
voice. 

“Exactly,” said Harry, looking calmly up into Uncle 
Vernon’s large, purple face. “It’s a lot to remember. I’ll 
have to make it sound convincing, won’t I? What if I 
accidentally let something slip?” 

“ You’ll get the stuffing knocked out of you, won’t you?” 
roared Uncle Vernon, advancing on Harry with his fist 
raised. But Harry stood his ground. 

“Knocking the stuffing out of me won’t make Aunt 
Marge forget what I could tell her,” he said grimly. 

Uncle Vernon stopped, his fist still raised, his face an 
ugly puce. 

“But if you sign my permission form,” Harry went on 
quickly, “I swear I’ll remember where I’m supposed to 
go to school, and I’ll act like a Mug — like I’m normal 
and everything.” 

Harry could tell that Uncle Vernon was thinking it 
over, even if his teeth were bared and a vein was 
throbbing in his temple. 



Page | 22 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Right,” he snapped finally. “I shall monitor your 
behavior carefully during Marge’s visit. If, at the end 
of it, you’ve toed the line and kept to the story, I’ll 
sign your ruddy form.” 

He wheeled around, pulled open the front door, and 
slammed it so hard that one of the little panes of 
glass at the top fell out. 

Harry didn’t return to the kitchen. He went back 
upstairs to his bedroom. If he was going to act like a 
real Muggle, he’d better start now. Slowly and sadly 
he gathered up all his presents and his birthday 
cards and hid them under the loose floorboard with 
his homework. Then he went to Hedwig’s cage. Errol 
seemed to have recovered; he and Hedwig were both 
asleep, heads under their wings. Harry sighed, then 
poked them both awake. 

“Hedwig,” he said gloomily, “you’re going to have to 
clear off for a week. Go with Errol. Ron’ll look after 
you. I’ll write him a note, explaining. And don’t look at 
me like that” — Hedwig’s large amber eyes were 
reproachful — “it’s not my fault. It’s the only way I’ll 
be allowed to visit Hogsmeade with Ron and 
Hermione.” 

Ten minutes later, Errol and Hedwig (who had a note 
to Ron bound to her leg) soared out of the window 
and out of sight. Harry, now feeling thoroughly 
miserable, put the empty cage away inside the 
wardrobe. 

But Harry didn’t have long to brood. In next to no 
time, Aunt Petunia was shrieking up the stairs for 
Harry to come down and get ready to welcome their 
guest. 



Page | 23 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Do something about your hair!” Aunt Petunia 
snapped as he reached the hall. 

Harry couldn’t see the point of trying to make his hair 
lie flat. Aunt Marge loved criticizing him, so the 
untidier he looked, the happier she would be. 

All too soon, there was a crunch of gravel outside as 
Uncle Vernon’s car pulled back into the driveway, 
then the clunk of the car doors and footsteps on the 
garden path. 

“Get the door!” Aunt Petunia hissed at Harry. 

A feeling of great gloom in his stomach, Harry pulled 
the door open. 

On the threshold stood Aunt Marge. She was very like 
Uncle Vernon: large, beefy, and purple-faced, she 
even had a mustache, though not as bushy as his. In 
one hand she held an enormous suitcase, and tucked 
under the other was an old and evil-tempered 
bulldog. 

“Where’s my Dudders?” roared Aunt Marge. “Where’s 
my neffy-poo?” 

Dudley came waddling down the hall, his blond hair 
plastered flat to his fat head, a bow tie just visible 
under his many chins. Aunt Marge thrust the 
suitcase into Harry’s stomach, knocking the wind out 
of him, seized Dudley in a tight one-armed hug, and 
planted a large kiss on his cheek. 

Harry knew perfectly well that Dudley only put up 
with Aunt Marge’s hugs because he was well paid for 
it, and sure enough, when they broke apart, Dudley 
had a crisp twenty-pound note clutched in his fat fist. 



Page | 24 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Petunia!” shouted Aunt Marge, striding past Harry as 
though he was a hat stand. Aunt Marge and Aunt 
Petunia kissed, or rather, Aunt Marge bumped her 
large jaw against Aunt Petunia’s bony cheekbone. 

Uncle Vernon now came in, smiling jovially as he shut 
the door. 

“Tea, Marge?” he said. “And what will Ripper take?” 

“Ripper can have some tea out of my saucer,” said 
Aunt Marge as they all proceeded into the kitchen, 
leaving Harry alone in the hall with the suitcase. But 
Harry wasn’t complaining; any excuse not to be with 
Aunt Marge was fine by him, so he began to heave the 
case upstairs into the spare bedroom, taking as long 
as he could. 

By the time he got back to the kitchen, Aunt Marge 
had been supplied with tea and fruitcake, and Ripper 
was lapping noisily in the corner. Harry saw Aunt 
Petunia wince slightly as specks of tea and drool 
flecked her clean floor. Aunt Petunia hated animals. 

“Who’s looking after the other dogs, Marge?” Uncle 
Vernon asked. 

“Oh, I’ve got Colonel Fubster managing them,” 
boomed Aunt Marge. “He’s retired now, good for him 
to have something to do. But I couldn’t leave poor old 
Ripper. He pines if he’s away from me.” 

Ripper began to growl again as Harry sat down. This 
directed Aunt Marge’s attention to Harry for the first 
time. 

“So!” she barked. “Still here, are you?” 

“Yes,” said Harry. 

Page | 25 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t you say ‘yes’ in that ungrateful tone,” Aunt 
Marge growled. “It’s damn good of Vernon and 
Petunia to keep you. Wouldn’t have done it myself. 
You’d have gone straight to an orphanage if you’d 
been dumped on my doorstep.” 

Harry was bursting to say that he’d rather live in an 
orphanage than with the Dursleys, but the thought of 
the Hogsmeade form stopped him. He forced his face 
into a painful smile. 

“Don’t you smirk at me!” boomed Aunt Marge. “I can 
see you haven’t improved since I last saw you. I hoped 
school would knock some manners into you.” She 
took a large gulp of tea, wiped her mustache, and 
said, “Where is it that you send him, again, Vernon?” 

“St. Brutus’s,” said Uncle Vernon promptly. “It’s a 
first-rate institution for hopeless cases.” 

“I see,” said Aunt Marge. “Do they use the cane at St. 
Brutus’s, boy?” she barked across the table. 

“Er — ” 



Uncle Vernon nodded curtly behind Aunt Marge’s 
back. 

“Yes,” said Harry. Then, feeling he might as well do 
the thing properly, he added, “all the time.” 

“Excellent,” said Aunt Marge. “I won’t have this 
namby-pamby, wishy-washy nonsense about not 
hitting people who deserve it. A good thrashing is 
what’s needed in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred. 
Have you been beaten often?” 

“Oh, yeah,” said Harry, “loads of times.” 



Page | 26 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Aunt Marge narrowed her eyes. 



“I still don’t like your tone, boy,” she said. “If you can 
speak of your beatings in that casual way, they 
clearly aren’t hitting you hard enough. Petunia, I’d 
write if I were you. Make it clear that you approve the 
use of extreme force in this boy’s case.” 

Perhaps Uncle Vernon was worried that Harry might 
forget their bargain; in any case, he changed the 
subject abruptly. 

“Heard the news this morning, Marge? What about 
that escaped prisoner, eh?” 

As Aunt Marge started to make herself at home, Harry 
caught himself thinking almost longingly of life at 
number four without her. Uncle Vernon and Aunt 
Petunia usually encouraged Harry to stay out of their 
way, which Harry was only too happy to do. Aunt 
Marge, on the other hand, wanted Harry under her 
eye at all times, so that she could boom out 
suggestions for his improvement. She delighted in 
comparing Harry with Dudley, and took huge 
pleasure in buying Dudley expensive presents while 
glaring at Harry, as though daring him to ask why he 
hadn’t got a present too. She also kept throwing out 
dark hints about what made Harry such an 
unsatisfactory person. 

“You mustn’t blame yourself for the way the boy’s 
turned out, Vernon,” she said over lunch on the third 
day. “If there’s something rotten on the inside, there’s 
nothing anyone can do about it.” 

Harry tried to concentrate on his food, but his hands 
shook and his face was starting to burn with anger. 
Remember the form, he told himself. Think about 
Hogsmeade. Don’t say anything. Don’t rise — 

Page | 27 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Aunt Marge reached for her glass of wine. 



“It’s one of the basic rules of breeding,” she said. “You 
see it all the time with dogs. If there’s something 
wrong with the bitch, there’ll be something wrong 
with the pup — ” 

At that moment, the wineglass Aunt Marge was 
holding exploded in her hand. Shards of glass flew in 
every direction and Aunt Marge sputtered and 
blinked, her great ruddy face dripping. 

“Marge!” squealed Aunt Petunia. “Marge, are you all 
right?” 

“Not to worry,” grunted Aunt Marge, mopping her face 
with her napkin. “Must have squeezed it too hard. Did 
the same thing at Colonel Fubster’s the other day. No 
need to fuss, Petunia, I have a very firm grip ...” 

But Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon were both 
looking at Harry suspiciously, so he decided he’d 
better skip dessert and escape from the table as soon 
as he could. 

Outside in the hall, he leaned against the wall, 
breathing deeply. It had been a long time since he’d 
lost control and made something explode. He couldn’t 
afford to let it happen again. The Hogsmeade form 
wasn’t the only thing at stake — if he carried on like 
that, he’d be in trouble with the Ministry of Magic. 

Harry was still an underage wizard, and he was 
forbidden by wizard law to do magic outside school. 
His record wasn’t exactly clean either. Only last 
summer he’d gotten an official warning that had 
stated quite clearly that if the Ministry got wind of 
any more magic in Privet Drive, Harry would face 
expulsion from Hogwarts. 

Page | 28 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He heard the Dursleys leaving the table and hurried 
upstairs out of the way. 

Harry got through the next three days by forcing 
himself to think about his Handbook of Do-It-Yourself 
Broomcare whenever Aunt Marge started on him. This 
worked quite well, though it seemed to give him a 
glazed look, because Aunt Marge started voicing the 
opinion that he was mentally subnormal. 

At last, at long last, the final evening of Marge’s stay 
arrived. Aunt Petunia cooked a fancy dinner and 
Uncle Vernon uncorked several bottles of wine. They 
got all the way through the soup and the salmon 
without a single mention of Harry’s faults; during the 
lemon meringue pie, Uncle Vernon bored them all 
with a long talk about Grunnings, his drill-making 
company; then Aunt Petunia made coffee and Uncle 
Vernon brought out a bottle of brandy. 

“Can I tempt you, Marge?” 

Aunt Marge had already had quite a lot of wine. Her 
huge face was very red. 

“Just a small one, then,” she chuckled. “A bit more 
than that ... and a bit more ... that’s the ticket.” 

Dudley was eating his fourth slice of pie. Aunt 
Petunia was sipping coffee with her little finger 
sticking out. Harry really wanted to disappear into his 
bedroom, but he met Uncle Vernon’s angry little eyes 
and knew he would have to sit it out. 

“Aah,” said Aunt Marge, smacking her lips and 
putting the empty brandy glass back down. “Excellent 
nosh, Petunia. It’s normally just a fry-up for me of an 
evening, with twelve dogs to look after. ...” She 
burped richly and patted her great tweed stomach. 
Page | 29 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Pardon me. But I do like to see a healthy-sized boy,” 
she went on, winking at Dudley. “You’ll be a proper- 
sized man, Dudders, like your father. Yes, I’ll have a 
spot more brandy, Vernon. ...” 

“Now, this one here — ” 

She jerked her head at Harry, who felt his stomach 
clench. The Handbook, he thought quickly. 

“This one’s got a mean, runty look about him. You get 
that with dogs. I had Colonel Fubster drown one last 
year. Ratty little thing it was. Weak. Underbred.” 

Harry was trying to remember page twelve of his 
book: A Charm to Cure Reluctant Reversers. 

“It all comes down to blood, as I was saying the other 
day. Bad blood will out. Now, I’m saying nothing 
against your family, Petunia” — she patted Aunt 
Petunia’s bony hand with her shovellike one — “but 
your sister was a bad egg. They turn up in the best 
families. Then she ran off with a wastrel and here’s 
the result right in front of us.” 

Harry was staring at his plate, a funny ringing in his 
ears. Grasp your broom firmly by the tail, he thought. 
But he couldn’t remember what came next. Aunt 
Marge’s voice seemed to be boring into him like one of 
Uncle Vernon’s drills. 

“This Potter,” said Aunt Marge loudly, seizing the 
brandy bottle and splashing more into her glass and 
over the tablecloth, “you never told me what he did?” 

Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia were looking 
extremely tense. Dudley had even looked up from his 
pie to gape at his parents. 



Page | 30 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“He — didn’t work,” said Uncle Vernon, with half a 
glance at Harry. “Unemployed.” 



“As I expected!” said Aunt Marge, taking a huge swig 
of brandy and wiping her chin on her sleeve. “A no- 
account, good-for-nothing, lazy scrounger who — ” 

“He was not,” said Harry suddenly. The table went 
very quiet. Harry was shaking all over. He had never 
felt so angry in his life. 

“MORE BRANDY!” yelled Uncle Vernon, who had gone 
very white. He emptied the bottle into Aunt Marge’s 
glass. “You, boy,” he snarled at Harry. “Go to bed, go 
on — ” 



“No, Vernon,” hiccuped Aunt Marge, holding up a 
hand, her tiny bloodshot eyes fixed on Harry’s. “Go 
on, boy, go on. Proud of your parents, are you? They 
go and get themselves killed in a car crash (drunk, I 
expect) — ” 

“They didn’t die in a car crash!” said Harry, who 
found himself on his feet. 

“They died in a car crash, you nasty little liar, and left 
you to be a burden on their decent, hardworking 
relatives!” screamed Aunt Marge, swelling with fury. 
“You are an insolent, ungrateful little — ” 

But Aunt Marge suddenly stopped speaking. For a 
moment, it looked as though words had failed her. 

She seemed to be swelling with inexpressible anger — 
but the swelling didn’t stop. Her great red face started 
to expand, her tiny eyes bulged, and her mouth 
stretched too tightly for speech — next second, 
several buttons had just burst from her tweed jacket 
and pinged off the walls — she was inflating like a 
monstrous balloon, her stomach bursting free of her 
Page | 31 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




tweed waistband, each of her fingers blowing up like a 
salami — 

“MARGE!” yelled Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia 
together as Aunt Marge’s whole body began to rise off 
her chair toward the ceiling. She was entirely round, 
now, like a vast life buoy with piggy eyes, and her 
hands and feet stuck out weirdly as she drifted up 
into the air, making apoplectic popping noises. Ripper 
came skidding into the room, barking madly. 

“NOOOOOOO!” 

Uncle Vernon seized one of Marge’s feet and tried to 
pull her down again, but was almost lifted from the 
floor himself. A second later, Ripper leapt forward and 
sank his teeth into Uncle Vernon’s leg. 

Harry tore from the dining room before anyone could 
stop him, heading for the cupboard under the stairs. 
The cupboard door burst magically open as he 
reached it. In seconds, he had heaved his trunk to the 
front door. He sprinted upstairs and threw himself 
under the bed, wrenching up the loose floorboard, 
and grabbed the pillowcase full of his books and 
birthday presents. He wriggled out, seized Hedwig’s 
empty cage, and dashed back downstairs to his 
trunk, just as Uncle Vernon burst out of the dining 
room, his trouser leg in bloody tatters. 

“COME BACK IN HERE!” he bellowed. “COME BACK 
AND PUT HER RIGHT!” 

But a reckless rage had come over Harry. He kicked 
his trunk open, pulled out his wand, and pointed it at 
Uncle Vernon. 

“She deserved it,” Harry said, breathing very fast. 

“She deserved what she got. You keep away from me.” 

Page | 32 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He fumbled behind him for the latch on the door. 



“I’m going,” Harry said. “I’ve had enough.” 

And in the next moment, he was out in the dark, 
quiet street, heaving his heavy trunk behind him, 
Hedwig’s cage under his arm. 



Page | 33 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




3 




THE KNIGHT BUS 

Harry was several streets away before he collapsed 
onto a low wall in Magnolia Crescent, panting from 
the effort of dragging his trunk. He sat quite still, 
anger still surging through him, listening to the 
frantic thumping of his heart. 

But after ten minutes alone in the dark street, a new 
emotion overtook him: panic. Whichever way he 
looked at it, he had never been in a worse fix. He was 
stranded, quite alone, in the dark Muggle world, with 
absolutely nowhere to go. And the worst of it was, he 
had just done serious magic, which meant that he 
was almost certainly expelled from Hogwarts. He had 
broken the Decree for the Restriction of Underage 
Wizardry so badly, he was surprised Ministry of Magic 
representatives weren’t swooping down on him where 
he sat. 

Harry shivered and looked up and down Magnolia 
Crescent. What was going to happen to him? Would 
he be arrested, or would he simply be outlawed from 
the wizarding world? He thought of Ron and 

Page | 34 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



Hermione, and his heart sank even lower. Harry was 
sure that, criminal or not, Ron and Hermione would 
want to help him now, but they were both abroad, 
and with Hedwig gone, he had no means of contacting 
them. 

He didn’t have any Muggle money, either. There was a 
little wizard gold in the money bag at the bottom of 
his trunk, but the rest of the fortune his parents had 
left him was stored in a vault at Gringotts Wizarding 
Bank in London. He’d never be able to drag his trunk 
all the way to London. Unless ... 

He looked down at his wand, which he was still 
clutching in his hand. If he was already expelled (his 
heart was now thumping painfully fast), a bit more 
magic couldn’t hurt. He had the Invisibility Cloak he 
had inherited from his father — what if he bewitched 
the trunk to make it feather-light, tied it to his 
broomstick, covered himself in the cloak, and flew to 
London? Then he could get the rest of his money out 
of his vault and ... begin his life as an outcast. It was 
a horrible prospect, but he couldn’t sit on this wall 
forever, or he’d find himself trying to explain to 
Muggle police why he was out in the dead of night 
with a trunkful of spellbooks and a broomstick. 

Harry opened his trunk again and pushed the 
contents aside, looking for the Invisibility Cloak — 
but before he had found it, he straightened up 
suddenly, looking around him once more. 

A funny prickling on the back of his neck had made 
Harry feel he was being watched, but the street 
appeared to be deserted, and no lights shone from 
any of the large square houses. 

He bent over his trunk again, but almost immediately 
stood up once more, his hand clenched on his wand. 

Page | 35 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He had sensed rather than heard it: someone or 
something was standing in the narrow gap between 
the garage and the fence behind him. Harry squinted 
at the black alleyway. If only it would move, then he’d 
know whether it was just a stray cat or — something 
else. 

“Lumos,” Harry muttered, and a light appeared at the 
end of his wand, almost dazzling him. He held it high 
over his head, and the pebble-dashed walls of number 
two suddenly sparkled; the garage door gleamed, and 
between them Harry saw, quite distinctly, the hulking 
outline of something very big, with wide, gleaming 
eyes. 

Harry stepped backward. His legs hit his trunk and 
he tripped. His wand flew out of his hand as he flung 
out an arm to break his fall, and he landed, hard, in 
the gutter — 

There was a deafening BANG, and Harry threw up his 
hands to shield his eyes against a sudden blinding 
light — 

With a yell, he rolled back onto the pavement, just in 
time. A second later, a gigantic pair of wheels and 
headlights screeched to a halt exactly where Harry 
had just been lying. They belonged, as Harry saw 
when he raised his head, to a triple-decker, violently 
purple bus, which had appeared out of thin air. Gold 
lettering over the windshield spelled The Knight Bus. 

For a split second, Harry wondered if he had been 
knocked silly by his fall. Then a conductor in a purple 
uniform leapt out of the bus and began to speak 
loudly to the night. 

“Welcome to the Knight Bus, emergency transport for 
the stranded witch or wizard. Just stick out your 

Page | 36 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




wand hand, step on board, and we can take you 
anywhere you want to go. My name is Stan Shunpike, 
and I will be your conductor this eve — ” 

The conductor stopped abruptly. He had just caught 
sight of Harry, who was still sitting on the ground. 
Harry snatched up his wand again and scrambled to 
his feet. Close up, he saw that Stan Shunpike was 
only a few years older than he was, eighteen or 
nineteen at most, with large, protruding ears and 
quite a few pimples. 

“What were you doin’ down there?” said Stan, 
dropping his professional manner. 

“Fell over,” said Harry. 

“ ’Choo fall over for?” sniggered Stan. 

“I didn’t do it on purpose,” said Harry, annoyed. One 
of the knees in his jeans was torn, and the hand he 
had thrown out to break his fall was bleeding. He 
suddenly remembered why he had fallen over and 
turned around quickly to stare at the alleyway 
between the garage and fence. The Knight Bus’s 
headlamps were flooding it with light, and it was 
empty. 

“ ’Choo lookin’ at?” said Stan. 

“There was a big black thing,” said Harry, pointing 
uncertainly into the gap. “Like a dog ... but massive 



He looked around at Stan, whose mouth was slightly 
open. With a feeling of unease, Harry saw Stan’s eyes 
move to the scar on Harry’s forehead. 

“Woss that on your ’ead?” said Stan abruptly. 

Page | 37 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Nothing,” said Harry quickly, flattening his hair over 
his scar. If the Ministry of Magic was looking for him, 
he didn’t want to make it too easy for them. 

“Woss your name?” Stan persisted. 

“Neville Longbottom,” said Harry, saying the first 
name that came into his head. “So — so this bus,” he 
went on quickly, hoping to distract Stan, “did you say 
it goes anywhere?” 

“Yep,” said Stan proudly, “anywhere you like, long’s 
it’s on land. Can’t do nuffink underwater. ’Ere,” he 
said, looking suspicious again, “you did flag us down, 
dincha? Stuck out your wand ’and, dincha?” 

“Yes,” said Harry quickly. “Listen, how much would it 
be to get to London?” 

“Eleven Sickles,” said Stan, “but for firteen you get ’ot 
chocolate, and for fifteen you get an ’ot water bottle 
an’ a toofbrush in the color of your choice.” 

Harry rummaged once more in his trunk, extracted 
his money bag, and shoved some gold into Stan’s 
hand. He and Stan then lifted his trunk, with 
Hedwig’s cage balanced on top, up the steps of the 
bus. 

There were no seats; instead, half a dozen brass 
bedsteads stood beside the curtained windows. 
Candles were burning in brackets beside each bed, 
illuminating the wood-paneled walls. A tiny wizard in 
a nightcap at the rear of the bus muttered, “Not now, 
thanks, I’m pickling some slugs” and rolled over in his 
sleep. 

“You ’ave this one,” Stan whispered, shoving Harry’s 
trunk under the bed right behind the driver, who was 

Page | 38 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




sitting in an armchair in front of the steering wheel. 
“This is our driver, Ernie Prang. This is Neville 
Longbottom, Ern.” 

Ernie Prang, an elderly wizard wearing very thick 
glasses, nodded to Harry, who nervously flattened his 
bangs again and sat down on his bed. 

“Take ’er away, Ern,” said Stan, sitting down in the 
armchair next to Ernie’s. 

There was another tremendous BANG, and the next 
moment Harry found himself flat on his bed, thrown 
backward by the speed of the Knight Bus. Pulling 
himself up, Harry stared out of the dark window and 
saw that they were now bowling along a completely 
different street. Stan was watching Harry’s stunned 
face with great enjoyment. 

“This is where we was before you flagged us down,” he 
said. “Where are we, Ern? Somewhere in Wales?” 

“Ar,” said Ernie. 

“How come the Muggles don’t hear the bus?” said 
Harry. 

“Them!” said Stan contemptuously. “Don’ listen 
properly, do they? Don’ look properly either. Never 
notice nuffink, they don’.” 

“Best go wake up Madam Marsh, Stan,” said Ern. 
“Well be in Abergavenny in a minute.” 

Stan passed Harry’s bed and disappeared up a 
narrow wooden staircase. Harry was still looking out 
of the window, feeling increasingly nervous. Ernie 
didn’t seem to have mastered the use of a steering 
wheel. The Knight Bus kept mounting the pavement, 
Page | 39 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




but it didn’t hit anything; lines of lampposts, 
mailboxes, and trash cans jumped out of its way as it 
approached and back into position once it had 
passed. 

Stan came back downstairs, followed by a faintly 
green witch wrapped in a traveling cloak. 

“ ’Ere you go, Madam Marsh,” said Stan happily as 
Ern stamped on the brake and the beds slid a foot or 
so toward the front of the bus. Madam Marsh 
clamped a handkerchief to her mouth and tottered 
down the steps. Stan threw her bag out after her and 
rammed the doors shut; there was another loud 
BANG, and they were thundering down a narrow 
country lane, trees leaping out of the way. 

Harry wouldn’t have been able to sleep even if he had 
been traveling on a bus that didn’t keep banging 
loudly and jumping a hundred miles at a time. His 
stomach churned as he fell back to wondering what 
was going to happen to him, and whether the 
Dursleys had managed to get Aunt Marge off the 
ceiling yet. 

Stan had unfurled a copy of the Daily Prophet and 
was now reading with his tongue between his teeth. A 
large photograph of a sunken-faced man with long, 
matted hair blinked slowly at Harry from the front 
page. He looked strangely familiar. 

“That man!” Harry said, forgetting his troubles for a 
moment. “He was on the Muggle news!” 

Stanley turned to the front page and chuckled. 

“Sirius Black,” he said, nodding. “ ’Course ’e was on 
the Muggle news, Neville, where you been?” 



Page | 40 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He gave a superior sort of chuckle at the blank look 
on Harry’s face, removed the front page, and handed 
it to Harry. 

“You oughta read the papers more, Neville.” 

Harry held the paper up to the candlelight and read: 
BLACK STILL AT LARGE 

Sirius Black, possibly the most infamous prisoner 
ever to be held in Azkaban fortress, is still eluding 
capture, the Ministry of Magic confirmed today. 

“We are doing all we can to recapture Black,” said the 
Minister of Magic, Cornelius Fudge, this morning, 

“and we beg the magical community to remain calm.” 

Fudge has been criticized by some members of the 
International Federation of Warlocks for informing the 
Muggle Prime Minister of the crisis. 

“Well, really, I had to, don’t you know,” said an 
irritable Fudge. “Black is mad. He’s a danger to 
anyone who crosses him, magic or Muggle. I have the 
Prime Minister’s assurance that he will not breathe a 
word of Black’s true identity to anyone. And let’s face 
it — who’d believe him if he did?” 

While Muggles have been told that Black is carrying a 
gun (a kind of metal wand that Muggles use to kill 
each other), the magical community lives in fear of a 
massacre like that of twelve years ago, when Black 
murdered thirteen people with a single curse. 



Harry looked into the shadowed eyes of Sirius Black, 
the only part of the sunken face that seemed alive. 

Page | 41 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry had never met a vampire, but he had seen 
pictures of them in his Defense Against the Dark Arts 
classes, and Black, with his waxy white skin, looked 
just like one. 

“Scary-lookin’ fing, inee?” said Stan, who had been 
watching Harry read. 

“He murdered thirteen people?” said Harry, handing 
the page back to Stan, “with one curse?” 

“Yep,” said Stan, “in front of witnesses an’ all. Broad 
daylight. Big trouble it caused, dinnit, Ern?” 

“Ar,” said Ern darkly. 

Stan swiveled in his armchair, his hands on the back, 
the better to look at Harry. 

“Black woz a big supporter of You-Know-’Oo,” he said. 

“What, Voldemort?” said Harry, without thinking. 

Even Stan’s pimples went white; Ern jerked the 
steering wheel so hard that a whole farmhouse had to 
jump aside to avoid the bus. 

“You outta your tree?” yelped Stan. “ ’Choo say ’is 
name for?” 

“Sorry,” said Harry hastily. “Sorry, I — I forgot — ” 

“Forgot!” said Stan weakly. “Blimey, my ’eart’s goin’ 
that fast...” 

“So — so Black was a supporter of You-Know-Who?” 
Harry prompted apologetically. 



Page | 42 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah,” said Stan, still rubbing his chest. “Yeah, 
that’s right. Very close to You-Know-’Oo, they say. 
Anyway, when little ’Arry Potter got the better of You- 
Know-’Oo — ” 

Harry nervously flattened his bangs down again. 

“ — all You-Know-’Oo’s supporters was tracked down, 
wasn’t they, Ern? Most of ’em knew it was all over, 
wiv You-Know-’Oo gone, and they came quiet. But not 
Sirius Black. I ’eard he thought ’e’d be second-in- 
command once You-Know-’Oo ’ad taken over. 

“Anyway, they cornered Black in the middle of a street 
full of Muggles an’ Black took out ’is wand and ’e 
blasted ’alf the street apart, an’ a wizard got it, an’ so 
did a dozen Muggles what got in the way. ’Orrible, eh? 
An’ you know what Black did then?” Stan continued 
in a dramatic whisper. 

“What?” said Harry. 

“Laughed,” said Stan. “Jus’ stood there an’ laughed. 
An’ when reinforcements from the Ministry of Magic 
got there, ’e went wiv ’em quiet as anyfink, still 
laughing ’is ’ead off. ’Cos ’e’s mad, inee, Ern? Inee 
mad?” 

“If he weren’t when he went to Azkaban, he will be 
now,” said Ern in his slow voice. “I’d blow meself up 
before I set foot in that place. Serves him right, mind 
you ... after what he did. ...” 

“They ’ad a job coverin’ it up, din’ they, Ern?” Stan 
said. “ ’Ole street blown up an’ all them Muggles 
dead. What was it they said ’ad ’appened, Ern?” 

“Gas explosion,” grunted Ernie. 



Page | 43 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“An’ now ’e’s out,” said Stan, examining the 
newspaper picture of Black’s gaunt face again. “Never 
been a breakout from Azkaban before, ’as there, Ern? 
Beats me ’ow ’e did it. Frightenin’, eh? Mind, I don’t 
fancy ’is chances against them Azkaban guards, eh, 
Ern?” 

Ernie suddenly shivered. 

“Talk about summat else, Stan, there’s a good lad. 
Them Azkaban guards give me the collywobbles.” 

Stan put the paper away reluctantly, and Harry 
leaned against the window of the Knight Bus, feeling 
worse than ever. He couldn’t help imagining what 
Stan might be telling his passengers in a few nights’ 
time. 

“ ’Ear about that ’Arry Potter? Blew up ’is aunt! We 
’ad ’im ’ere on the Knight Bus, di’n’t we, Ern? ’E was 
tryin’ to run for it. ...” 

He, Harry, had broken wizard law just like Sirius 
Black. Was inflating Aunt Marge bad enough to land 
him in Azkaban? Harry didn’t know anything about 
the wizard prison, though everyone he’d ever heard 
speak of it did so in the same fearful tone. Hagrid, the 
Hogwarts gamekeeper, had spent two months there 
only last year. Harry wouldn’t soon forget the look of 
terror on Hagrid ’s face when he had been told where 
he was going, and Hagrid was one of the bravest 
people Harry knew. 

The Knight Bus rolled through the darkness, 
scattering bushes and wastebaskets, telephone 
booths and trees, and Harry lay, restless and 
miserable, on his feather bed. After a while, Stan 
remembered that Harry had paid for hot chocolate, 
but poured it all over Harry’s pillow when the bus 
Page | 44 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




moved abruptly from Anglesey to Aberdeen. One by 
one, wizards and witches in dressing gowns and 
slippers descended from the upper floors to leave the 
bus. They all looked very pleased to go. 

Finally, Harry was the only passenger left. 

“Right then, Neville,” said Stan, clapping his hands, 
“whereabouts in London?” 

“Diagon Alley,” said Harry. 

“Righto,” said Stan. “ ’Old tight, then ...” 

BANG! 

They were thundering along Charing Cross Road. 
Harry sat up and watched buildings and benches 
squeezing themselves out of the Knight Bus’s way. 

The sky was getting a little lighter. He would lie low 
for a couple of hours, go to Gringotts the moment it 
opened, then set off — where, he didn’t know. 

Ern slammed on the brakes and the Knight Bus 
skidded to a halt in front of a small and shabby- 
looking pub, the Leaky Cauldron, behind which lay 
the magical entrance to Diagon Alley. 

“Thanks,” Harry said to Ern. 

He jumped down the steps and helped Stan lower his 
trunk and Hedwig’s cage onto the pavement. 

“Well,” said Harry. “ ’Bye then!” 

But Stan wasn’t paying attention. Still standing in the 
doorway to the bus, he was goggling at the shadowy 
entrance to the Leaky Cauldron. 



Page | 45 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ There you are, Harry,” said a voice. 



Before Harry could turn, he felt a hand on his 
shoulder. At the same time, Stan shouted, “Blimey! 
Ern, come ’ere! Come ’ere!” 

Harry looked up at the owner of the hand on his 
shoulder and felt a bucketful of ice cascade into his 
stomach — he had walked right into Cornelius Fudge, 
the Minister of Magic himself. 

Stan leapt onto the pavement beside them. 

“What didja call Neville, Minister?” he said excitedly. 

Fudge, a portly little man in a long, pinstriped cloak, 
looked cold and exhausted. 

“Neville?” he repeated, frowning. “This is Harry 
Potter.” 

“I knew it!” Stan shouted gleefully. “Ern! Ern! Guess 
’oo Neville is, Ern! ’E’s ’Arry Potter! I can see ’is scar!” 

“Yes,” said Fudge testily, “well, I’m very glad the 
Knight Bus picked Harry up, but he and I need to 
step inside the Leaky Cauldron now ...” 

Fudge increased the pressure on Harry’s shoulder, 
and Harry found himself being steered inside the pub. 
A stooping figure bearing a lantern appeared through 
the door behind the bar. It was Tom, the wizened, 
toothless landlord. 

“You’ve got him, Minister!” said Tom. “Will you be 
wanting anything? Beer? Brandy?” 

“Perhaps a pot of tea,” said Fudge, who still hadn’t let 
go of Harry. 

Page | 46 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




There was a loud scraping and puffing from behind 
them, and Stan and Ern appeared, carrying Harry’s 
trunk and Hedwig’s cage and looking around 
excitedly. 

“ ’Ow come you di’n’t tell us ’oo you are, eh, Neville?” 
said Stan, beaming at Harry, while Ernie’s owlish face 
peered interestedly over Stan’s shoulder. 

“And a private parlor, please, Tom,” said Fudge 
pointedly. 

“ ’Bye,” Harry said miserably to Stan and Ern as Tom 
beckoned Fudge toward the passage that led from the 
bar. 

“ ’Bye, Neville!” called Stan. 

Fudge marched Harry along the narrow passage after 
Tom’s lantern, and then into a small parlor. Tom 
clicked his fingers, a fire burst into life in the grate, 
and he bowed himself out of the room. 

“Sit down, Harry,” said Fudge, indicating a chair by 
the fire. 

Harry sat down, feeling goose bumps rising up his 
arms despite the glow of the fire. Fudge took off his 
pinstriped cloak and tossed it aside, then hitched up 
the trousers of his bottle-green suit and sat down 
opposite Harry. 

“I am Cornelius Fudge, Harry. The Minister of Magic.” 

Harry already knew this, of course; he had seen 
Fudge once before, but as he had been wearing his 
father’s Invisibility Cloak at the time, Fudge wasn’t to 
know that. 



Page | 47 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Tom the innkeeper reappeared, wearing an apron over 
his nightshirt and bearing a tray of tea and crumpets. 
He placed the tray on a table between Fudge and 
Harry and left the parlor, closing the door behind 
him. 

“Well, Harry,” said Fudge, pouring out tea, “you’ve 
had us all in a right flap, I don’t mind telling you. 
Running away from your aunt and uncle’s house like 
that! I’d started to think ... but you’re safe, and that’s 
what matters.” 

Fudge buttered himself a crumpet and pushed the 
plate toward Harry. 

“Eat, Harry, you look dead on your feet. Now then ... 
You will be pleased to hear that we have dealt with 
the unfortunate blowing-up of Miss Marjorie Dursley. 
Two members of the Accidental Magic Reversal Squad 
were dispatched to Privet Drive a few hours ago. Miss 
Dursley has been punctured and her memory has 
been modified. She has no recollection of the incident 
at all. So that’s that, and no harm done.” 

Fudge smiled at Harry over the rim of his teacup, 
rather like an uncle surveying a favorite nephew. 
Harry, who couldn’t believe his ears, opened his 
mouth to speak, couldn’t think of anything to say, 
and closed it again. 

“Ah, you’re worrying about the reaction of your aunt 
and uncle?” said Fudge. “Well, I won’t deny that they 
are extremely angry, Harry, but they are prepared to 
take you back next summer as long as you stay at 
Hogwarts for the Christmas and Easter holidays.” 

Harry unstuck his throat. 



Page | 48 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I always stay at Hogwarts for the Christmas and 
Easter holidays,” he said, “and I don’t ever want to go 
back to Privet Drive.” 

“Now, now, I’m sure you’ll feel differently once you’ve 
calmed down,” said Fudge in a worried tone. “They 
are your family, after all, and I’m sure you are fond of 
each other — er — very deep down.” 

It didn’t occur to Harry to put Fudge right. He was 
still waiting to hear what was going to happen to him 
now. 

“So all that remains,” said Fudge, now buttering 
himself a second crumpet, “is to decide where you’re 
going to spend the last three weeks of your vacation. I 
suggest you take a room here at the Leaky Cauldron 
and — ” 

“Hang on,” blurted Harry. “What about my 
punishment?” 

Fudge blinked. 

“Punishment?” 

“I broke the law!” Harry said. “The Decree for the 
Restriction of Underage Wizardry!” 

“Oh, my dear boy, we’re not going to punish you for a 
little thing like that!” cried Fudge, waving his crumpet 
impatiently. “It was an accident! We don’t send people 
to Azkaban just for blowing up their aunts!” 

But this didn’t tally at all with Harry’s past dealings 
with the Ministry of Magic. 

“Last year, I got an official warning just because a 
house-elf smashed a pudding in my uncle’s house!” 

Page | 49 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




he told Fudge, frowning. “The Ministry of Magic said 
I’d be expelled from Hogwarts if there was any more 
magic there!” 

Unless Harry’s eyes were deceiving him, Fudge was 
suddenly looking awkward. 

“Circumstances change, Harry. ... We have to take 
into account ... in the present climate . . . Surely you 
don’t want to be expelled?” 

“Of course I don’t,” said Harry. 

“Well then, what’s all the fuss about?” laughed Fudge. 
“Now, have a crumpet, Harry, while I go and see if 
Tom’s got a room for you.” 

Fudge strode out of the parlor and Harry stared after 
him. There was something extremely odd going on. 
Why had Fudge been waiting for him at the Leaky 
Cauldron, if not to punish him for what he’d done? 
And now Harry came to think of it, surely it wasn’t 
usual for the Minister of Magic himself to get involved 
in matters of underage magic? 

Fudge came back, accompanied by Tom the 
innkeeper. 

“Room eleven’s free, Harry,” said Fudge. “I think you’ll 
be very comfortable. Just one thing, and I’m sure 
you’ll understand ... I don’t want you wandering off 
into Muggle London, all right? Keep to Diagon Alley. 
And you’re to be back here before dark each night. 
Sure you’ll understand. Tom will be keeping an eye on 
you for me.” 

“Okay,” said Harry slowly, “but why — ?” 



Page | 50 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t want to lose you again, do we?” said Fudge 
with a hearty laugh. “No, no ... best we know where 
you are. ... I mean ...” 

Fudge cleared his throat loudly and picked up his 
pinstriped cloak. 

“Well, I’ll be off, plenty to do, you know. ...” 

“Have you had any luck with Black yet?” Harry asked. 

Fudge’s finger slipped on the silver fastenings of his 
cloak. 

“What’s that? Oh, you’ve heard — well, no, not yet, 
but it’s only a matter of time. The Azkaban guards 
have never yet failed ... and they are angrier than I’ve 
ever seen them.” 

Fudge shuddered slightly. 

“So, I’ll say good-bye.” 

He held out his hand and Harry, shaking it, had a 
sudden idea. 

“Er — Minister? Can I ask you something?” 

“Certainly,” said Fudge with a smile. 

“Well, third years at Hogwarts are allowed to visit 
Hogsmeade, but my aunt and uncle didn’t sign the 
permission form. D’you think you could — ?” 

Fudge was looking uncomfortable. 

“Ah,” he said. “No, no, I’m very sorry, Harry, but as 
I’m not your parent or guardian — ” 



Page | 51 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“But you’re the Minister of Magic,” said Harry eagerly. 
“If you gave me permission — ” 

“No, I’m sorry, Harry, but rules are rules,” said Fudge 
flatly. “Perhaps you’ll be able to visit Hogsmeade next 
year. In fact, I think it’s best if you don’t ... yes ... 
well, I’ll be off. Enjoy your stay, Harry.” 

And with a last smile and shake of Harry’s hand, 
Fudge left the room. Tom now moved forward, 
beaming at Harry. 

“If you’ll follow me, Mr. Potter,” he said, “I’ve already 
taken your things up. ...” 

Harry followed Tom up a handsome wooden staircase 
to a door with a brass number eleven on it, which 
Tom unlocked and opened for him. 

Inside was a very comfortable-looking bed, some 
highly polished oak furniture, a cheerfully crackling 
fire and, perched on top of the wardrobe — 

“Hedwig!” Harry gasped. 

The snowy owl clicked her beak and fluttered down 
onto Harry’s arm. 

“Very smart owl you’ve got there,” chuckled Tom. 
“Arrived about five minutes after you did. If there’s 
anything you need, Mr. Potter, don’t hesitate to ask.” 

He gave another bow and left. 

Harry sat on his bed for a long time, absentmindedly 
stroking Hedwig. The sky outside the window was 
changing rapidly from deep, velvety blue to cold, 
steely gray and then, slowly, to pink shot with gold. 
Harry could hardly believe that he’d left Privet Drive 
Page | 52 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




only a few hours ago, that he wasn’t expelled, and 
that he was now facing three Dursley-free weeks. 



“It’s been a very weird night, Hedwig,” he yawned. 

And without even removing his glasses, he slumped 
back onto his pillows and fell asleep. 



Page | 53 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






THE LEAKY CAULDRON 

It took Harry several days to get used to his strange 
new freedom. Never before had he been able to get up 
whenever he wanted or eat whatever he fancied. He 
could even go wherever he pleased, as long as it was 
in Diagon Alley, and as this long cobbled street was 
packed with the most fascinating wizarding shops in 
the world, Harry felt no desire to break his word to 
Fudge and stray back into the Muggle world. 

Harry ate breakfast each morning in the Leaky 
Cauldron, where he liked watching the other guests: 
funny little witches from the country, up for a day’s 
shopping; venerable-looking wizards arguing over the 
latest article in Transfiguration Today; wild-looking 
warlocks; raucous dwarfs; and once, what looked 
suspiciously like a hag, who ordered a plate of raw 
liver from behind a thick woollen balaclava. 

After breakfast Harry would go out into the backyard, 
take out his wand, tap the third brick from the left 
above the trash bin, and stand back as the archway 
into Diagon Alley opened in the wall. 

Page | 54 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



Harry spent the long sunny days exploring the shops 
and eating under the brightly colored umbrellas 
outside cafes, where his fellow diners were showing 
one another their purchases (“it’s a lunascope, old 
boy — no more messing around with moon charts, 
see?”) or else discussing the case of Sirius Black 
(“personally, I won’t let any of the children out alone 
until he’s back in Azkaban”). Harry didn’t have to do 
his homework under the blankets by flashlight 
anymore; now he could sit in the bright sunshine 
outside Florean Fortescue’s Ice Cream Parlor, 
finishing all his essays with occasional help from 
Florean Fortescue himself, who, apart from knowing a 
great deal about medieval witch burnings, gave Harry 
free sundaes every half an hour. 

Once Harry had refilled his money bag with gold 
Galleons, silver Sickles, and bronze Knuts from his 
vault at Gringotts, he had to exercise a lot of self- 
control not to spend the whole lot at once. He had to 
keep reminding himself that he had five years to go at 
Hogwarts, and how it would feel to ask the Dursleys 
for money for spellbooks, to stop himself from buying 
a handsome set of solid gold Gobstones (a wizarding 
game rather like marbles, in which the stones squirt a 
nasty-smelling liquid into the other player’s face when 
they lose a point). He was sorely tempted, too, by the 
perfect, moving model of the galaxy in a large glass 
ball, which would have meant he never had to take 
another Astronomy lesson. But the thing that tested 
Harry’s resolution most appeared in his favorite shop, 
Quality Quidditch Supplies, a week after he’d arrived 
at the Leaky Cauldron. 

Curious to know what the crowd in the shop was 
staring at, Harry edged his way inside and squeezed 
in among the excited witches and wizards until he 
glimpsed a newly erected podium, on which was 



Page | 55 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




mounted the most magnificent broom he had ever 
seen in his life. 

“Just come out — prototype — ” a square-jawed 
wizard was telling his companion. 

“It’s the fastest broom in the world, isn’t it, Dad?” 
squeaked a boy younger than Harry, who was 
swinging off his father’s arm. 

“Irish International Side’s just put in an order for 
seven of these beauties!” the proprietor of the shop 
told the crowd. “And they’re favorites for the World 
Cup!” 

A large witch in front of Harry moved, and he was 
able to read the sign next to the broom: 

THE FIREBOLT 

This state-of-the-art racing broom sports a stream- 
lined, superfine handle of ash, treated with a 
diamond-hard polish and hand-numbered with its 
own registration number. Each individually selected 
birch twig in the broomtail has been honed to 
aerodynamic perfection, giving the Firebolt 
unsurpassable balance and pinpoint precision. The 
Firebolt has an acceleration of 150 miles an hour in 
ten seconds and incorporates an unbreakable 
Braking Charm. Price on request. 

Price on request ... Harry didn’t like to think how 
much gold the Firebolt would cost. He had never 
wanted anything as much in his whole life — but he 
had never lost a Quidditch match on his Nimbus Two 
Thousand, and what was the point in emptying his 
Gringotts vault for the Firebolt, when he had a very 
good broom already? Harry didn’t ask for the price, 



Page | 56 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




but he returned, almost every day after that, just to 
look at the Firebolt. 

There were, however, things that Harry needed to 
buy. He went to the Apothecary to replenish his store 
of potions ingredients, and as his school robes were 
now several inches too short in the arm and leg, he 
visited Madam Malkin’s Robes for All Occasions and 
bought new ones. Most important of all, he had to 
buy his new schoolbooks, which would include those 
for his two new subjects, Care of Magical Creatures 
and Divination. 

Harry got a surprise as he looked in at the bookshop 
window. Instead of the usual display of gold- 
embossed spellbooks the size of paving slabs, there 
was a large iron cage behind the glass that held about 
a hundred copies of The Monster Book of Monsters. 
Torn pages were flying everywhere as the books 
grappled with each other, locked together in furious 
wrestling matches and snapping aggressively. 

Harry pulled his booklist out of his pocket and 
consulted it for the first time. The Monster Book of 
Monsters was listed as the required book for Care of 
Magical Creatures. Now Harry understood why Hagrid 
had said it would come in useful. He felt relieved; he 
had been wondering whether Hagrid wanted help with 
some terrifying new pet. 

As Harry entered Flourish and Blotts, the manager 
came hurrying toward him. 

“Hogwarts?” he said abruptly. “Come to get your new 
books?” 

“Yes,” said Harry, “I need — ” 



Page | 57 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Get out of the way,” said the manager impatiently, 
brushing Harry aside. He drew on a pair of very thick 
gloves, picked up a large, knobbly walking stick, and 
proceeded toward the door of the Monster Books’ cage. 

“Hang on,” said Harry quickly, “I’ve already got one of 
those.” 

“Have you?” A look of enormous relief spread over the 
manager’s face. “Thank heavens for that. I’ve been 
bitten five times already this morning — ” 

A loud ripping noise rent the air; two of the Monster 
Books had seized a third and were pulling it apart. 

“Stop it! Stop it!” cried the manager, poking the 
walking stick through the bars and knocking the 
books apart. “I’m never stocking them again, never! 

It’s been bedlam! I thought we’d seen the worst when 
we bought two hundred copies of the Invisible Book of 
Invisibility — cost a fortune, and we never found 
them. ... Well ... is there anything else I can help you 
with?” 

“Yes,” said Harry, looking down his booklist, “I need 
Unfogging the Future by Cassandra Vablatsky.” 

“Ah, starting Divination, are you?” said the manager, 
stripping off his gloves and leading Harry into the 
back of the shop, where there was a corner devoted to 
fortune-telling. A small table was stacked with 
volumes such as Predicting the Unpredictable: Insulate 
Yourself Against Shocks and Broken Balls: When 
Fortunes Turn Foul. 

“Here you are,” said the manager, who had climbed a 
set of steps to take down a thick, black-bound book. 
“Unfogging the Future. Very good guide to all your 



Page | 58 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




basic fortune-telling methods — palmistry, crystal 
balls, bird entrails — ” 

But Harry wasn’t listening. His eyes had fallen on 
another book, which was among a display on a small 
table: Death Omens: What to Do When You Know the 
Worst Is Coming. 

“Oh, I wouldn’t read that if I were you,” said the 
manager lightly, looking to see what Harry was 
staring at. “You’ll start seeing death omens 
everywhere. It’s enough to frighten anyone to death.” 

But Harry continued to stare at the front cover of the 
book; it showed a black dog large as a bear, with 
gleaming eyes. It looked oddly familiar. ... 

The manager pressed Unfogging the Future into 
Harry’s hands. 

“Anything else?” he said. 

“Yes,” said Harry, tearing his eyes away from the 
dog’s and dazedly consulting his booklist. “Er — I 
need Intermediate Transfiguration and The Standard 
Book of Spells, Grade Three.” 

Harry emerged from Flourish and Blotts ten minutes 
later with his new books under his arms and made 
his way back to the Leaky Cauldron, hardly noticing 
where he was going and bumping into several people. 

He tramped up the stairs to his room, went inside, 
and tipped his books onto his bed. Somebody had 
been in to tidy; the windows were open and sun was 
pouring inside. Harry could hear the buses rolling by 
in the unseen Muggle street behind him and the 
sound of the invisible crowd below in Diagon Alley. He 
caught sight of himself in the mirror over the basin. 
Page | 59 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It can’t have been a death omen,” he told his 
reflection defiantly. “I was panicking when I saw that 
thing in Magnolia Crescent. ... It was probably just a 
stray dog. ...” 

He raised his hand automatically and tried to make 
his hair lie flat. 

“You’re fighting a losing battle there, dear,” said his 
mirror in a wheezy voice. 

As the days slipped by, Harry started looking 
wherever he went for a sign of Ron or Hermione. 

Plenty of Hogwarts students were arriving in Diagon 
Alley now, with the start of term so near. Harry met 
Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas, his fellow 
Gryffindors, in Quality Quidditch Supplies, where 
they too were ogling the Firebolt; he also ran into the 
real Neville Longbottom, a round-faced, forgetful boy, 
outside Flourish and Blotts. Harry didn’t stop to chat; 
Neville appeared to have mislaid his booklist and was 
being told off by his very formidable-looking 
grandmother. Harry hoped she never found out that 
he’d pretended to be Neville while on the run from the 
Ministry of Magic. 

Harry woke on the last day of the holidays, thinking 
that he would at least meet Ron and Hermione 
tomorrow, on the Hogwarts Express. He got up, 
dressed, went for a last look at the Firebolt, and was 
just wondering where he’d have lunch, when someone 
yelled his name and he turned. 

“Harry! HARRY!” 

They were there, both of them, sitting outside Florean 
Fortescue’s Ice Cream Parlor — Ron looking 
incredibly freckly, Hermione very brown, both waving 
frantically at him. 

Page | 60 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Finally!” said Ron, grinning at Harry as he sat down. 
“We went to the Leaky Cauldron, but they said you’d 
left, and we went to Flourish and Blotts, and Madam 
Malkin’s, and — ” 

“I got all my school stuff last week,” Harry explained. 
“And how come you knew I’m staying at the Leaky 
Cauldron?” 

“Dad,” said Ron simply. 

Mr. Weasley, who worked at the Ministry of Magic, 
would of course have heard the whole story of what 
had happened to Aunt Marge. 

“Did you really blow up your aunt, Harry?” said 
Hermione in a very serious voice. 

“I didn’t mean to,” said Harry while Ron roared with 
laughter. “I just — lost control.” 

“It’s not funny, Ron,” said Hermione sharply. 
“Honestly, I’m amazed Harry wasn’t expelled.” 

“So am I,” admitted Harry. “Forget expelled, I thought 
I was going to be arrested.” He looked at Ron. “Your 
dad doesn’t know why Fudge let me off, does he?” 

“Probably ’cause it’s you, isn’t it?” shrugged Ron, still 
chuckling. “Famous Harry Potter and all that. I’d hate 
to see what the Ministry’d do to me if I blew up an 
aunt. Mind you, they’d have to dig me up first, 
because Mum would’ve killed me. Anyway, you can 
ask Dad yourself this evening. We’re staying at the 
Leaky Cauldron tonight too! So you can come to 
King’s Cross with us tomorrow! Hermione’s there as 
well!” 



Page | 61 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione nodded, beaming. “Mum and Dad dropped 
me off this morning with all my Hogwarts things.” 

“Excellent!” said Harry happily. “So, have you got all 
your new books and stuff?” 

“Look at this,” said Ron, pulling a long thin box out of 
a bag and opening it. “Brand-new wand. Fourteen 
inches, willow, containing one unicorn tail-hair. And 
we’ve got all our books — ” He pointed at a large bag 
under his chair. “What about those Monster Books, 
eh? The assistant nearly cried when we said we 
wanted two.” 

“What’s all that, Hermione?” Harry asked, pointing at 
not one but three bulging bags in the chair next to 
her. 

“Well, I’m taking more new subjects than you, aren’t 
I?” said Hermione. “Those are my books for 
Arithmancy, Care of Magical Creatures, Divination, 
Study of Ancient Runes, Muggle Studies — ” 

“What are you doing Muggle Studies for?” said Ron, 
rolling his eyes at Harry. “You’re Muggle-born! Your 
mum and dad are Muggles! You already know all 
about Muggles!” 

“But it’ll be fascinating to study them from the 
wizarding point of view,” said Hermione earnestly. 

“Are you planning to eat or sleep at all this year, 
Hermione?” asked Harry, while Ron sniggered. 
Hermione ignored them. 

“I’ve still got ten Galleons,” she said, checking her 
purse. “It’s my birthday in September, and Mum and 
Dad gave me some money to get myself an early 
birthday present.” 

Page | 62 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“How about a nice book?” said Ron innocently. 

“No, I don’t think so,” said Hermione composedly. “I 
really want an owl. I mean, Harry’s got Hedwig and 
you’ve got Errol — ” 

“I haven’t,” said Ron. “Errol’s a family owl. All I’ve got 
is Scabbers.” He pulled his pet rat out of his pocket. 
“And I want to get him checked over,” he added, 
placing Scabbers on the table in front of them. “I 
don’t think Egypt agreed with him.” 

Scabbers was looking thinner than usual, and there 
was a definite droop to his whiskers. 

“There’s a magical creature shop just over there,” said 
Harry, who knew Diagon Alley very well by now. “You 
could see if they’ve got anything for Scabbers, and 
Hermione can get her owl.” 

So they paid for their ice cream and crossed the street 
to the Magical Menagerie. 

There wasn’t much room inside. Every inch of wall 
was hidden by cages. It was smelly and very noisy 
because the occupants of these cages were all 
squeaking, squawking, jabbering, or hissing. The 
witch behind the counter was already advising a 
wizard on the care of double-ended newts, so Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione waited, examining the cages. 

A pair of enormous purple toads sat gulping wetly 
and feasting on dead blowflies. A gigantic tortoise 
with a jewel-encrusted shell was glittering near the 
window. Poisonous orange snails were oozing slowly 
up the side of their glass tank, and a fat white rabbit 
kept changing into a silk top hat and back again with 
a loud popping noise. Then there were cats of every 
color, a noisy cage of ravens, a basket of funny 
Page | 63 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




custard-colored furballs that were humming loudly, 
and on the counter, a vast cage of sleek black rats 
that were playing some sort of skipping game using 
their long, bald tails. 

The double-ended newt wizard left, and Ron 
approached the counter. 

“It’s my rat,” he told the witch. “He been a bit off-color 
ever since I brought him back from Egypt.” 

“Bang him on the counter,” said the witch, pulling a 
pair of heavy black spectacles out of her pocket. 

Ron lifted Scabbers out of his inside pocket and 
placed him next to the cage of his fellow rats, who 
stopped their skipping tricks and scuffled to the wire 
for a better look. 

Like nearly everything Ron owned, Scabbers the rat 
was secondhand (he had once belonged to Ron’s 
brother Percy) and a bit battered. Next to the glossy 
rats in the cage, he looked especially woebegone. 

“Hm,” said the witch, picking up Scabbers. “How old 
is this rat?” 

“Dunno,” said Ron. “Quite old. He used to belong to 
my brother.” 

“What powers does he have?” said the witch, 
examining Scabbers closely. 

“Er — ” The truth was that Scabbers had never shown 
the faintest trace of interesting powers. The witch’s 
eyes moved from Scabbers ’s tattered left ear to his 
front paw, which had a toe missing, and tutted 
loudly. 



Page | 64 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“He’s been through the mill, this one,” she said. 



“He was like that when Percy gave him to me,” said 
Ron defensively. 

“An ordinary common or garden rat like this can’t be 
expected to live longer than three years or so,” said 
the witch. “Now, if you were looking for something a 
bit more hard-wearing, you might like one of these — ” 

She indicated the black rats, who promptly started 
skipping again. Ron muttered, “Show-offs.” 

“Well, if you don’t want a replacement, you can try 
this rat tonic,” said the witch, reaching under the 
counter and bringing out a small red bottle. 

“Okay,” said Ron. “How much — OUCH!” 

Ron buckled as something huge and orange came 
soaring from the top of the highest cage, landed on 
his head, and then propelled itself, spitting madly, at 
Scabbers. 

“NO, CROOKSHANKS, NO!” cried the witch, but 
Scabbers shot from between her hands like a bar of 
soap, landed splay-legged on the floor, and then 
scampered for the door. 

“Scabbers!” Ron shouted, racing out of the shop after 
him; Harry followed. 

It took them nearly ten minutes to catch Scabbers, 
who had taken refuge under a wastepaper bin outside 
Quality Quidditch Supplies. Ron stuffed the trembling 
rat back into his pocket and straightened up, 
massaging his head. 

“What was that?” 

Page | 65 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It was either a very big cat or quite a small tiger,” 
said Harry. 

“Where’s Hermione?” 

“Probably getting her owl — ” 

They made their way back up the crowded street to 
the Magical Menagerie. As they reached it, Hermione 
came out, but she wasn’t carrying an owl. Her arms 
were clamped tightly around the enormous ginger cat. 

“You bought that monster?” said Ron, his mouth 
hanging open. 

“He’s gorgeous, isn’t he?” said Hermione, glowing. 

That was a matter of opinion, thought Harry. The 
cat’s ginger fur was thick and fluffy, but it was 
definitely a bit bowlegged and its face looked grumpy 
and oddly squashed, as though it had run headlong 
into a brick wall. Now that Scabbers was out of sight, 
however, the cat was purring contentedly in 
Hermione ’s arms. 

“Hermione, that thing nearly scalped me!” said Ron. 

“He didn’t mean to, did you, Crookshanks?” said 
Hermione. 

“And what about Scabbers?” said Ron, pointing at the 
lump in his chest pocket. “He needs rest and 
relaxation! How’s he going to get it with that thing 
around?” 

“That reminds me, you forgot your rat tonic,” said 
Hermione, slapping the small red bottle into Ron’s 
hand. “And stop worrying, Crookshanks will be 
sleeping in my dormitory and Scabbers in yours, 

Page | 66 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




what’s the problem? Poor Crookshanks, that witch 
said he’d been in there for ages; no one wanted him.” 

“I wonder why,” said Ron sarcastically as they set off 
toward the Leaky Cauldron. 

They found Mr. Weasley sitting in the bar, reading the 
Daily Prophet. 

“Harry!” he said, smiling as he looked up. “How are 
you?” 

“Fine, thanks,” said Harry as he, Ron, and Hermione 
joined Mr. Weasley with all their shopping. 

Mr. Weasley put down his paper, and Harry saw the 
now familiar picture of Sirius Black staring up at him. 

“They still haven’t caught him, then?” he asked. 

“No,” said Mr. Weasley, looking extremely grave. 
“They’ve pulled us all off our regular jobs at the 
Ministry to try and find him, but no luck so far.” 

“Would we get a reward if we caught him?” asked 
Ron. “It’d be good to get some more money — ” 

“Don’t be ridiculous, Ron,” said Mr. Weasley, who on 
closer inspection looked very strained. “Black’s not 
going to be caught by a thirteen-year-old wizard. It’s 
the Azkaban guards who’ll get him back, you mark 
my words.” 

At that moment Mrs. Weasley entered the bar, laden 
with shopping bags and followed by the twins, Fred 
and George, who were about to start their fifth year at 
Hogwarts; the newly elected Head Boy, Percy; and the 
Weasleys’ youngest child and only girl, Ginny. 



Page | 67 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Ginny, who had always been very taken with Harry, 
seemed even more heartily embarrassed than usual 
when she saw him, perhaps because he had saved 
her life during their previous year at Hogwarts. She 
went very red and muttered “hello” without looking at 
him. Percy, however, held out his hand solemnly as 
though he and Harry had never met and said, “Harry. 
How nice to see you.” 

“Hello, Percy,” said Harry, trying not to laugh. 

“I hope you’re well?” said Percy pompously, shaking 
hands. It was rather like being introduced to the 
mayor. 

“Very well, thanks — ” 

“Harry!” said Fred, elbowing Percy out of the way and 
bowing deeply. “Simply splendid to see you, old boy — 



“Marvelous,” said George, pushing Fred aside and 
seizing Harry’s hand in turn. “Absolutely spiffing.” 

Percy scowled. 

“That’s enough, now,” said Mrs. Weasley. 

“Mum!” said Fred as though he’d only just spotted her 
and seizing her hand too. “How really corking to see 
you — ” 

“I said, that’s enough,” said Mrs. Weasley, depositing 
her shopping in an empty chair. “Hello, Harry, dear. I 
suppose you’ve heard our exciting news?” She pointed 
to the brand-new silver badge on Percy’s chest. 
“Second Head Boy in the family!” she said, swelling 
with pride. 



Page | 68 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“And last,” Fred muttered under his breath. 



“I don’t doubt that,” said Mrs. Weasley, frowning 
suddenly. “I notice they haven’t made you two 
prefects.” 

“What do we want to be prefects for?” said George, 
looking revolted at the very idea. “It’d take all the fun 
out of life.” 

Ginny giggled. 

“You want to set a better example for your sister!” 
snapped Mrs. Weasley. 

“Ginny’s got other brothers to set her an example, 
Mother,” said Percy loftily. “I’m going up to change for 
dinner. ...” 

He disappeared and George heaved a sigh. 

“We tried to shut him in a pyramid,” he told Harry. 
“But Mum spotted us.” 

Dinner that night was a very enjoyable affair. Tom the 
innkeeper put three tables together in the parlor, and 
the seven Weasleys, Harry, and Hermione ate their 
way through five delicious courses. 

“How’re we getting to King’s Cross tomorrow, Dad?” 
asked Fred as they dug into a sumptuous chocolate 
pudding. 

“The Ministry’s providing a couple of cars,” said Mr. 
Weasley. 

Everyone looked up at him. 

“Why?” said Percy curiously. 

Page | 69 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s because of you, Perce,” said George seriously. 
“And there’ll be little flags on the hoods, with HB on 
them — ” 

“ — for Humongous Bighead,” said Fred. 

Everyone except Percy and Mrs. Weasley snorted into 
their pudding. 

“Why are the Ministry providing cars, Father?” Percy 
asked again, in a dignified voice. 

“Well, as we haven’t got one anymore,” said Mr. 
Weasley, “ — and as I work there, they’re doing me a 
favor — ” 

His voice was casual, but Harry couldn’t help noticing 
that Mr. Weasley’s ears had gone red, just like Ron’s 
did when he was under pressure. 

“Good thing, too,” said Mrs. Weasley briskly. “Do you 
realize how much luggage you’ve all got between you? 
A nice sight you’d be on the Muggle Underground. ... 
You are all packed, aren’t you?” 

“Ron hasn’t put all his new things in his trunk yet,” 
said Percy, in a long-suffering voice. “He’s dumped 
them on my bed.” 

“You’d better go and pack properly, Ron, because we 
won’t have much time in the morning,” Mrs. Weasley 
called down the table. Ron scowled at Percy. 

After dinner everyone felt very full and sleepy. One by 
one they made their way upstairs to their rooms to 
check their things for the next day. Ron and Percy 
were next door to Harry. He had just closed and 
locked his own trunk when he heard angry voices 
through the wall, and went to see what was going on. 
Page | 70 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The door of number twelve was ajar and Percy was 
shouting. 

“It was here, on the bedside table, I took it off for 
polishing — ” 

“I haven’t touched it, all right?” Ron roared back. 
“What’s up?” said Harry. 

“My Head Boy badge is gone,” said Percy, rounding on 
Harry. 

“So’s Scabbers’s rat tonic,” said Ron, throwing things 
out of his trunk to look. “I think I might’ve left it in 
the bar — ” 

“You’re not going anywhere till you’ve found my 
badge!” yelled Percy. 

“I’ll get Scabbers’s stuff, I’m packed,” Harry said to 
Ron, and he went downstairs. 

Harry was halfway along the passage to the bar, 
which was now very dark, when he heard another 
pair of angry voices coming from the parlor. A second 
later, he recognized them as Mr. and Mrs. Weasleys’. 
He hesitated, not wanting them to know he’d heard 
them arguing, when the sound of his own name made 
him stop, then move closer to the parlor door. 

“... makes no sense not to tell him,” Mr. Weasley was 
saying heatedly. “Harry’s got a right to know. I’ve tried 
to tell Fudge, but he insists on treating Harry like a 
child. He’s thirteen years old and — ” 

“Arthur, the truth would terrify him!” said Mrs. 
Weasley shrilly. “Do you really want to send Harry 



Page | 71 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




back to school with that hanging over him? For 
heaven’s sake, he’s happy not knowing!” 

“I don’t want to make him miserable, I want to put 
him on his guard!” retorted Mr. Weasley. “You know 
what Harry and Ron are like, wandering off by 
themselves — they’ve even ended up in the Forbidden 
Forest! But Harry mustn’t do that this year! When I 
think what could have happened to him that night he 
ran away from home! If the Knight Bus hadn’t picked 
him up, I’m prepared to bet he would have been dead 
before the Ministry found him.” 

“But he’s not dead, he’s fine, so what’s the point — ” 

“Molly, they say Sirius Black’s mad, and maybe he is, 
but he was clever enough to escape from Azkaban, 
and that’s supposed to be impossible. It’s been a 
month, and no one’s seen hide nor hair of him, and I 
don’t care what Fudge keeps telling the Daily Prophet, 
we’re no nearer catching Black than inventing self- 
spelling wands. The only thing we know for sure is 
what Black’s after — ” 

“But Harry will be perfectly safe at Hogwarts.” 

“We thought Azkaban was perfectly safe. If Black can 
break out of Azkaban, he can break into Hogwarts.” 

“But no one’s really sure that Black’s after Harry — ” 

There was a thud on wood, and Harry was sure Mr. 
Weasley had banged his fist on the table. 

“Molly, how many times do I have to tell you? They 
didn’t report it in the press because Fudge wanted it 
kept quiet, but Fudge went out to Azkaban the night 
Black escaped. The guards told Fudge that Black’s 
been talking in his sleep for a while now. Always the 
Page | 72 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




same words: ‘He’s at Hogwarts ... he’s at Hogwarts.’ 
Black is deranged, Molly, and he wants Harry dead. If 
you ask me, he thinks murdering Harry will bring 
You-Know-Who back to power. Black lost everything 
the night Harry stopped You-Know-Who, and he’s had 
twelve years alone in Azkaban to brood on that. ...” 

There was a silence. Harry leaned still closer to the 
door, desperate to hear more. 

“Well, Arthur, you must do what you think is right. 
But you’re forgetting Albus Dumbledore. I don’t think 
anything could hurt Harry at Hogwarts while 
Dumbledore ’s headmaster. I suppose he knows about 
all this?” 

“Of course he knows. We had to ask him if he minds 
the Azkaban guards stationing themselves around the 
entrances to the school grounds. He wasn’t happy 
about it, but he agreed.” 

“Not happy? Why shouldn’t he be happy, if they’re 
there to catch Black?” 

“Dumbledore isn’t fond of the Azkaban guards,” said 
Mr. Weasley heavily. “Nor am I, if it comes to that ... 
but when you’re dealing with a wizard like Black, you 
sometimes have to join forces with those you’d rather 
avoid.” 

“If they save Harry — ” 

“ — then I will never say another word against them,” 
said Mr. Weasley wearily. “It’s late, Molly, we’d better 
go up. ...” 

Harry heard chairs move. As quietly as he could, he 
hurried down the passage to the bar and out of sight. 
The parlor door opened, and a few seconds later 

Page | 73 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




footsteps told him that Mr. and Mrs. Weasley were 
climbing the stairs. 



The bottle of rat tonic was lying under the table they 
had sat at earlier. Harry waited until he heard Mr. 
and Mrs. Weasley’s bedroom door close, then headed 
back upstairs with the bottle. 

Fred and George were crouching in the shadows on 
the landing, heaving with laughter as they listened to 
Percy dismantling his and Ron’s room in search of his 
badge. 

“We’ve got it,” Fred whispered to Harry. “We’ve been 
improving it.” 

The badge now read BigheacL Boy. 

Harry forced a laugh, went to give Ron the rat tonic, 
then shut himself in his room and lay down on his 
bed. 

So Sirius Black was after him. This explained 
everything. Fudge had been lenient with him because 
he was so relieved to find him alive. He’d made Harry 
promise to stay in Diagon Alley where there were 
plenty of wizards to keep an eye on him. And he was 
sending two Ministry cars to take them all to the 
station tomorrow, so that the Weasleys could look 
after Harry until he was on the train. 

Harry lay listening to the muffled shouting next door 
and wondered why he didn’t feel more scared. Sirius 
Black had murdered thirteen people with one curse; 
Mr. and Mrs. Weasley obviously thought Harry would 
be panic-stricken if he knew the truth. But Harry 
happened to agree wholeheartedly with Mrs. Weasley 
that the safest place on earth was wherever Albus 
Dumbledore happened to be. Didn’t people always say 
Page | 74 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




that Dumbledore was the only person Lord Voldemort 
had ever been afraid of? Surely Black, as Voldemort’s 
right-hand man, would be just as frightened of him? 

And then there were these Azkaban guards everyone 
kept talking about. They seemed to scare most people 
senseless, and if they were stationed all around the 
school, Black’s chances of getting inside seemed very 
remote. 

No, all in all, the thing that bothered Harry most was 
the fact that his chances of visiting Hogsmeade now 
looked like zero. Nobody would want Harry to leave 
the safety of the castle until Black was caught; in 
fact, Harry suspected his every move would be 
carefully watched until the danger had passed. 

He scowled at the dark ceiling. Did they think he 
couldn’t look after himself? He’d escaped Lord 
Voldemort three times; he wasn’t completely useless. 



Unbidden, the image of the beast in the shadows of 
Magnolia Crescent crossed his mind. What to do when 
you know the worst is coming. . . . 

“I’m not going to be murdered,” Harry said out loud. 

“That’s the spirit, dear,” said his mirror sleepily. 



Page | 75 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




5 




THE DEMENTOR 

Tom woke Harry the next morning with his usual 
toothless grin and a cup of tea. Harry got dressed and 
was just persuading a disgruntled Hedwig to get back 
into her cage when Ron banged his way into the 
room, pulling a sweatshirt over his head and looking 
irritable. 

“The sooner we get on the train, the better,” he said. 
“At least I can get away from Percy at Hogwarts. Now 
he’s accusing me of dripping tea on his photo of 
Penelope Clearwater. You know,” Ron grimaced, “his 
girlfriend. She’s hidden her face under the frame 
because her nose has gone all blotchy. ...” 

“I’ve got something to tell you,” Harry began, but they 
were interrupted by Fred and George, who had looked 
in to congratulate Ron on infuriating Percy again. 

They headed down to breakfast, where Mr. Weasley 
was reading the front page of the Daily Prophet with a 
furrowed brow and Mrs. Weasley was telling 

Page | 76 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



Hermione and Ginny about a love potion she’d made 
as a young girl. All three of them were rather giggly. 

“What were you saying?” Ron asked Harry as they sat 
down. 

“Later,” Harry muttered as Percy stormed in. 

Harry had no chance to speak to Ron or Hermione in 
the chaos of leaving; they were too busy heaving all 
their trunks down the Leaky Cauldron’s narrow 
staircase and piling them up near the door, with 
Hedwig and Hermes, Percy’s screech owl, perched on 
top in their cages. A small wickerwork basket stood 
beside the heap of trunks, spitting loudly. 

“It’s all right, Crookshanks,” Hermione cooed through 
the wickerwork. “I’ll let you out on the train.” 

“You won’t,” snapped Ron. “What about poor 
Scabbers, eh?” 

He pointed at his chest, where a large lump indicated 
that Scabbers was curled up in his pocket. 

Mr. Weasley, who had been outside waiting for the 
Ministry cars, stuck his head inside. 

“They’re here,” he said. “Harry, come on.” 

Mr. Weasley marched Harry across the short stretch 
of pavement toward the first of two old-fashioned dark 
green cars, each of which was driven by a furtive- 
looking wizard wearing a suit of emerald velvet. 

“In you get, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley, glancing up and 
down the crowded street. 



Page | 77 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry got into the back of the car and was shortly 
joined by Hermione, Ron, and, to Ron’s disgust, 

Percy. 

The journey to King’s Cross was very uneventful 
compared with Harry’s trip on the Knight Bus. The 
Ministry of Magic cars seemed almost ordinary, 
though Harry noticed that they could slide through 
gaps that Uncle Vernon’s new company car certainly 
couldn’t have managed. They reached King’s Cross 
with twenty minutes to spare; the Ministry drivers 
found them trolleys, unloaded their trunks, touched 
their hats in salute to Mr. Weasley, and drove away, 
somehow managing to jump to the head of an 
unmoving line at the traffic lights. 

Mr. Weasley kept close to Harry’s elbow all the way 
into the station. 

“Right then,” he said, glancing around them. “Let’s do 
this in pairs, as there are so many of us. I’ll go 
through first with Harry.” 

Mr. Weasley strolled toward the barrier between 
platforms nine and ten, pushing Harry’s trolley and 
apparently very interested in the Intercity 125 that 
had just arrived at platform nine. With a meaningful 
look at Harry, he leaned casually against the barrier. 
Harry imitated him. 

In a moment, they had fallen sideways through the 
solid metal onto platform nine and three-quarters and 
looked up to see the Hogwarts Express, a scarlet 
steam engine, puffing smoke over a platform packed 
with witches and wizards seeing their children onto 
the train. 



Page | 78 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Percy and Ginny suddenly appeared behind Harry. 
They were panting and had apparently taken the 
barrier at a run. 

“Ah, there’s Penelope!” said Percy, smoothing his hair 
and going pink again. Ginny caught Harry’s eye, and 
they both turned away to hide their laughter as Percy 
strode over to a girl with long, curly hair, walking with 
his chest thrown out so that she couldn’t miss his 
shiny badge. 

Once the remaining Weasleys and Hermione had 
joined them, Harry and Ron led the way to the end of 
the train, past packed compartments, to a carriage 
that looked quite empty. They loaded the trunks onto 
it, stowed Hedwig and Crookshanks in the luggage 
rack, then went back outside to say good-bye to Mr. 
and Mrs. Weasley. 

Mrs. Weasley kissed all her children, then Hermione, 
and finally, Harry. He was embarrassed, but really 
quite pleased, when she gave him an extra hug. 

“Do take care, won’t you, Harry?” she said as she 
straightened up, her eyes oddly bright. Then she 
opened her enormous handbag and said, “I’ve made 
you all sandwiches. ... Here you are, Ron ... no, 
they’re not corned beef. ... Fred? Where’s Fred? Here 
you are, dear. ...” 

“Harry,” said Mr. Weasley quietly, “come over here a 
moment.” 

He jerked his head toward a pillar, and Harry followed 
him behind it, leaving the others crowded around 
Mrs. Weasley. 

“There’s something I’ve got to tell you before you leave 
— ” said Mr. Weasley, in a tense voice. 

Page | 79 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s all right, Mr. Weasley,” said Harry. “I already 
know.” 

“You know? How could you know?” 

“I — er — I heard you and Mrs. Weasley talking last 
night. I couldn’t help hearing,” Harry added quickly. 
“Sorry — ” 

“That’s not the way I’d have chosen for you to find 
out,” said Mr. Weasley, looking anxious. 

“No — honestly, it’s okay. This way, you haven’t 
broken your word to Fudge and I know what’s going 
on.” 

“Harry, you must be very scared — ” 

“I’m not,” said Harry sincerely. “Really” he added, 
because Mr. Weasley was looking disbelieving. “I’m 
not trying to be a hero, but seriously, Sirius Black 
can’t be worse than Voldemort, can he?” 

Mr. Weasley flinched at the sound of the name but 
overlooked it. 

“Harry, I knew you were, well, made of stronger stuff 
than Fudge seems to think, and I’m obviously pleased 
that you’re not scared, but — ” 

“Arthur!” called Mrs. Weasley, who was now 
shepherding the rest onto the train. “Arthur, what are 
you doing? It’s about to go!” 

“He’s coming, Molly!” said Mr. Weasley but he turned 
back to Harry and kept talking in a lower and more 
hurried voice. “Listen, I want you to give me your 
word — ” 



Page | 80 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ — that I’ll be a good boy and stay in the castle?” said 
Harry gloomily. 

“Not entirely,” said Mr. Weasley, who looked more 
serious than Harry had ever seen him. “Harry, swear 
to me you won’t go looking for Black.” 

Harry stared. “What?” 

There was a loud whistle. Guards were walking along 
the train, slamming all the doors shut. 

“Promise me, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley, talking more 
quickly still, “that whatever happens — ” 

“Why would I go looking for someone I know wants to 
kill me?” said Harry blankly. 

“Swear to me that whatever you might hear — ” 

“Arthur, quickly!” cried Mrs. Weasley. 

Steam was billowing from the train; it had started to 
move. Harry ran to the compartment door and Ron 
threw it open and stood back to let him on. They 
leaned out of the window and waved at Mr. and Mrs. 
Weasley until the train turned a corner and blocked 
them from view. 

“I need to talk to you in private,” Harry muttered to 
Ron and Hermione as the train picked up speed. 

“Go away, Ginny,” said Ron. 

“Oh, that’s nice,” said Ginny huffily, and she stalked 
off. 



Page | 81 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry, Ron, and Hermione set off down the corridor, 
looking for an empty compartment, but all were full 
except for the one at the very end of the train. 

This had only one occupant, a man sitting fast asleep 
next to the window. Harry, Ron, and Hermione 
checked on the threshold. The Hogwarts Express was 
usually reserved for students and they had never seen 
an adult there before, except for the witch who 
pushed the food cart. 

The stranger was wearing an extremely shabby set of 
wizard’s robes that had been darned in several places. 
He looked ill and exhausted. Though quite young, his 
light brown hair was flecked with gray. 

“Who d’you reckon he is?” Ron hissed as they sat 
down and slid the door shut, taking the seats farthest 
away from the window. 

“Professor R. J. Lupin,” whispered Hermione at once. 
“How d’you know that?” 

“It’s on his case,” she replied, pointing at the luggage 
rack over the man’s head, where there was a small, 
battered case held together with a large quantity of 
neatly knotted string. The name Professor R. J. Lupin 
was stamped across one corner in peeling letters. 

“Wonder what he teaches?” said Ron, frowning at 
Professor Lupin’s pallid profile. 

“That’s obvious,” whispered Hermione. “There’s only 
one vacancy, isn’t there? Defense Against the Dark 
Arts.” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione had already had two 
Defense Against the Dark Arts teachers, both of 

Page | 82 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




whom had lasted only one year. There were rumors 
that the job was jinxed. 

“Well, I hope he’s up to it,” said Ron doubtfully. “He 
looks like one good hex would finish him off, doesn’t 
he? Anyway ...” He turned to Harry. “What were you 
going to tell us?” 

Harry explained all about Mr. and Mrs. Weasley’s 
argument and the warning Mr. Weasley had just 
given him. When he’d finished, Ron looked 
thunderstruck, and Hermione had her hands over her 
mouth. She finally lowered them to say, “Sirius Black 
escaped to come after you? Oh, Harry ... you’ll have to 
be really, really careful. Don’t go looking for trouble, 
Harry — ” 

“I don’t go looking for trouble,” said Harry, nettled. 
“Trouble usually finds me.” 

“How thick would Harry have to be, to go looking for a 
nutter who wants to kill him?” said Ron shakily. 

They were taking the news worse than Harry had 
expected. Both Ron and Hermione seemed to be much 
more frightened of Black than he was. 

“No one knows how he got out of Azkaban,” said Ron 
uncomfortably. “No one’s ever done it before. And he 
was a top-security prisoner too.” 

“But they’ll catch him, won’t they?” said Hermione 
earnestly. “I mean, they’ve got all the Muggles looking 
out for him too. ...” 

“What’s that noise?” said Ron suddenly. 

A faint, tinny sort of whistle was coming from 
somewhere. They looked all around the compartment. 

Page | 83 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s coming from your trunk, Harry,” said Ron, 
standing up and reaching into the luggage rack. A 
moment later he had pulled the Pocket Sneakoscope 
out from between Harry’s robes. It was spinning very 
fast in the palm of Ron’s hand and glowing brilliantly. 

“Is that a Sneakoscope?” said Hermione interestedly, 
standing up for a better look. 

“Yeah ... mind you, it’s a very cheap one,” Ron said. 

“It went haywire just as I was tying it to Errol’s leg to 
send it to Harry.” 

“Were you doing anything untrustworthy at the time?” 
said Hermione shrewdly. 

“No! Well ... I wasn’t supposed to be using Errol. You 
know he’s not really up to long journeys ... but how 
else was I supposed to get Harry’s present to him?” 

“Stick it back in the trunk,” Harry advised as the 
Sneakoscope whistled piercingly, “or it’ll wake him 
up.” 

He nodded toward Professor Lupin. Ron stuffed the 
Sneakoscope into a particularly horrible pair of Uncle 
Vernon’s old socks, which deadened the sound, then 
closed the lid of the trunk on it. 

“We could get it checked in Hogsmeade,” said Ron, 
sitting back down. “They sell that sort of thing in 
Dervish and Banges, magical instruments and stuff. 
Fred and George told me.” 

“Do you know much about Hogsmeade?” asked 
Hermione keenly. “I’ve read it’s the only entirely non- 
Muggle settlement in Britain — ” 



Page | 84 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Yeah, I think it is,” said Ron in an offhand sort of 
way, “but that’s not why I want to go. I just want to 
get inside Honeydukes!” 

“What’s that?” said Hermione. 

“It’s this sweetshop,” said Ron, a dreamy look coming 
over his face, “where they’ve got everything. ... Pepper 
Imps — they make you smoke at the mouth — and 
great fat Chocoballs full of strawberry mousse and 
clotted cream, and really excellent sugar quills, which 
you can suck in class and just look like you’re 
thinking what to write next — ” 

“But Hogsmeade’s a very interesting place, isn’t it?” 
Hermione pressed on eagerly. “In Sites of Historical 
Sorcery it says the inn was the headquarters for the 
1612 goblin rebellion, and the Shrieking Shack’s 
supposed to be the most severely haunted building in 
Britain — ” 

“ — and massive sherbet balls that make you levitate a 
few inches off the ground while you’re sucking them,” 
said Ron, who was plainly not listening to a word 
Hermione was saying. 

Hermione looked around at Harry. 

“Won’t it be nice to get out of school for a bit and 
explore Hogsmeade?” 

“ ’Spect it will,” said Harry heavily. “You’ll have to tell 
me when you’ve found out.” 

“What d’you mean?” said Ron. 

“I can’t go. The Dursleys didn’t sign my permission 
form, and Fudge wouldn’t either.” 



Page | 85 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Ron looked horrified. 



“You’re not allowed to come? But — no way — 
McGonagall or someone will give you permission — ” 

Harry gave a hollow laugh. Professor McGonagall, 
head of Gryffindor House, was very strict. 

“ — or we can ask Fred and George, they know every 
secret passage out of the castle — ” 

“Ron!” said Hermione sharply. “I don’t think Harry 
should be sneaking out of school with Black on the 
loose — ” 

“Yeah, I expect that’s what McGonagall will say when 
I ask for permission,” said Harry bitterly. 

“But if we’re with him,” said Ron spiritedly to 
Hermione, “Black wouldn’t dare — ” 

“Oh, Ron, don’t talk rubbish,” snapped Hermione. 
“Black’s already murdered a whole bunch of people in 
the middle of a crowded street. Do you really think 
he’s going to worry about attacking Harry just 
because we’re there?” 

She was fumbling with the straps of Crookshanks’s 
basket as she spoke. 

“Don’t let that thing out!” Ron said, but too late; 
Crookshanks leapt lightly from the basket, stretched, 
yawned, and sprang onto Ron’s knees; the lump in 
Ron’s pocket trembled and he shoved Crookshanks 
angrily away. 

“Get out of here!” 

“Ron, don’t!” said Hermione angrily. 

Page | 86 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Ron was about to answer back when Professor Lupin 
stirred. They watched him apprehensively, but he 
simply turned his head the other way, mouth slightly 
open, and slept on. 

The Hogwarts Express moved steadily north and the 
scenery outside the window became wilder and darker 
while the clouds overhead thickened. People were 
chasing backward and forward past the door of their 
compartment. Crookshanks had now settled in an 
empty seat, his squashed face turned toward Ron, his 
yellow eyes on Ron’s top pocket. 

At one o’clock, the plump witch with the food cart 
arrived at the compartment door. 

“D’you think we should wake him up?” Ron asked 
awkwardly, nodding toward Professor Lupin. “He 
looks like he could do with some food.” 

Hermione approached Professor Lupin cautiously. 

“Er — Professor?” she said. “Excuse me — Professor?” 

He didn’t move. 

“Don’t worry, dear,” said the witch as she handed 
Harry a large stack of Cauldron Cakes. “If he’s hungry 
when he wakes, I’ll be up front with the driver.” 

“I suppose he is asleep?” said Ron quietly as the witch 
slid the compartment door closed. “I mean — he 
hasn’t died, has he?” 

“No, no, he’s breathing,” whispered Hermione, taking 
the Cauldron Cake Harry passed her. 

He might not be very good company, but Professor 
Lupin’s presence in their compartment had its uses. 

Page | 87 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Midafternoon, just as it had started to rain, blurring 
the rolling hills outside the window, they heard 
footsteps in the corridor again, and their three least 
favorite people appeared at the door: Draco Malfoy, 
flanked by his cronies, Vincent Crabbe and Gregory 
Goyle. 

Draco Malfoy and Harry had been enemies ever since 
they had met on their very first train journey to 
Hogwarts. Malfoy, who had a pale, pointed, sneering 
face, was in Slytherin House; he played Seeker on the 
Slytherin Quidditch team, the same position that 
Harry played on the Gryffindor team. Crabbe and 
Goyle seemed to exist to do Malfoy’s bidding. They 
were both wide and musclely; Crabbe was taller, with 
a pudding-bowl haircut and a very thick neck; Goyle 
had short, bristly hair and long, gorilla-ish arms. 

“Well, look who it is,” said Malfoy in his usual lazy 
drawl, pulling open the compartment door. “Potty and 
the Weasel.” 

Crabbe and Goyle chuckled trollishly. 

“I heard your father finally got his hands on some 
gold this summer, Weasley,” said Malfoy. “Did your 
mother die of shock?” 

Ron stood up so quickly he knocked Crookshanks’s 
basket to the floor. Professor Lupin gave a snort. 

“Who’s that?” said Malfoy, taking an automatic step 
backward as he spotted Lupin. 

“New teacher,” said Harry, who got to his feet, too, in 
case he needed to hold Ron back. “What were you 
saying, Malfoy?” 



Page | 88 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Malfoy’s pale eyes narrowed; he wasn’t fool enough to 
pick a fight right under a teacher’s nose. 

“C’mon,” he muttered resentfully to Crabbe and 
Goyle, and they disappeared. 

Harry and Ron sat down again, Ron massaging his 
knuckles. 

“I’m not going to take any crap from Malfoy this year,” 
he said angrily. “I mean it. If he makes one more 
crack about my family, I’m going to get hold of his 
head and — ” 

Ron made a violent gesture in midair. 

“Ron,” hissed Hermione, pointing at Professor Lupin, 
“be careful ...” 

But Professor Lupin was still fast asleep. 

The rain thickened as the train sped yet farther north; 
the windows were now a solid, shimmering gray, 
which gradually darkened until lanterns flickered into 
life all along the corridors and over the luggage racks. 
The train rattled, the rain hammered, the wind 
roared, but still, Professor Lupin slept. 

“We must be nearly there,” said Ron, leaning forward 
to look past Professor Lupin at the now completely 
black window. 

The words had hardly left him when the train started 
to slow down. 

“Great,” said Ron, getting up and walking carefully 
past Professor Lupin to try and see outside. “I’m 
starving. I want to get to the feast. ...” 



Page | 89 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“We can’t be there yet,” said Hermione, checking her 
watch. 

“So why’re we stopping?” 

The train was getting slower and slower. As the noise 
of the pistons fell away, the wind and rain sounded 
louder than ever against the windows. 

Harry, who was nearest the door, got up to look into 
the corridor. All along the carriage, heads were 
sticking curiously out of their compartments. 

The train came to a stop with a jolt, and distant thuds 
and bangs told them that luggage had fallen out of 
the racks. Then, without warning, all the lamps went 
out and they were plunged into total darkness. 

“What’s going on?” said Ron’s voice from behind 
Harry. 

“Ouch!” gasped Hermione. “Ron, that was my foot!” 
Harry felt his way back to his seat. 

“D’you think we’ve broken down?” 

“Dunno ...” 

There was a squeaking sound, and Harry saw the dim 
black outline of Ron, wiping a patch clean on the 
window and peering out. 

“There’s something moving out there,” Ron said. “I 
think people are coming aboard. ...” 

The compartment door suddenly opened and someone 
fell painfully over Harry’s legs. 



Page | 90 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Sorry — d’you know what’s going on? — Ouch — 
sorry — ” 

“Hullo, Neville,” said Harry, feeling around in the dark 
and pulling Neville up by his cloak. 

“Harry? Is that you? What’s happening?” 

“No idea — sit down — ” 

There was a loud hissing and a yelp of pain; Neville 
had tried to sit on Crookshanks. 

“I’m going to go and ask the driver what’s going on,” 
came Hermione’s voice. Harry felt her pass him, heard 
the door slide open again, and then a thud and two 
loud squeals of pain. 

“Who’s that?” 

“Who’s that?” 

“Ginny?” 

“Hermione?” 

“What are you doing?” 

“I was looking for Ron — ” 

“Come in and sit down — ” 

“Not here!” said Harry hurriedly. “I’m here!” 

“Ouch!” said Neville. 

“Quiet!” said a hoarse voice suddenly. 



Page | 91 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Professor Lupin appeared to have woken up at last. 
Harry could hear movements in his corner. None of 
them spoke. 

There was a soft, crackling noise, and a shivering 
light filled the compartment. Professor Lupin 
appeared to be holding a handful of flames. They 
illuminated his tired, gray face, but his eyes looked 
alert and wary. 

“Stay where you are,” he said in the same hoarse 
voice, and he got slowly to his feet with his handful of 
fire held out in front of him. 

But the door slid slowly open before Lupin could 
reach it. 

Standing in the doorway, illuminated by the shivering 
flames in Lupin’s hand, was a cloaked figure that 
towered to the ceiling. Its face was completely hidden 
beneath its hood. Harry’s eyes darted downward, and 
what he saw made his stomach contract. There was a 
hand protruding from the cloak and it was glistening, 
grayish, slimy-looking, and scabbed, like something 
dead that had decayed in water. . . . 

But it was visible only for a split second. As though 
the creature beneath the cloak sensed Harry’s gaze, 
the hand was suddenly withdrawn into the folds of its 
black cloak. 

And then the thing beneath the hood, whatever it 
was, drew a long, slow, rattling breath, as though it 
were trying to suck something more than air from its 
surroundings. 

An intense cold swept over them all. Harry felt his 
own breath catch in his chest. The cold went deeper 



Page | 92 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




than his skin. It was inside his chest, it was inside 
his very heart. ... 



Harry’s eyes rolled up into his head. He couldn’t see. 
He was drowning in cold. There was a rushing in his 
ears as though of water. He was being dragged 
downward, the roaring growing louder . . . 

And then, from far away, he heard screaming, 
terrible, terrified, pleading screams. He wanted to 
help whoever it was, he tried to move his arms, but 
couldn’t ... a thick white fog was swirling around him, 
inside him — 

“Harry! Harry! Are you all right?” 

Someone was slapping his face. 

“W — what?” 

Harry opened his eyes; there were lanterns above 
him, and the floor was shaking — the Hogwarts 
Express was moving again and the lights had come 
back on. He seemed to have slid out of his seat onto 
the floor. Ron and Hermione were kneeling next to 
him, and above them he could see Neville and 
Professor Lupin watching. Harry felt very sick; when 
he put up his hand to push his glasses back on, he 
felt cold sweat on his face. 

Ron and Hermione heaved him back onto his seat. 

“Are you okay?” Ron asked nervously. 

“Yeah,” said Harry, looking quickly toward the door. 
The hooded creature had vanished. “What happened? 
Where’s that — that thing? Who screamed?” 

“No one screamed,” said Ron, more nervously still. 

Page | 93 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry looked around the bright compartment. Ginny 
and Neville looked back at him, both very pale. 

“But I heard screaming — ” 

A loud snap made them all jump. Professor Lupin was 
breaking an enormous slab of chocolate into pieces. 

“Here,” he said to Harry, handing him a particularly 
large piece. “Eat it. It’ll help.” 

Harry took the chocolate but didn’t eat it. 

“What was that thing?” he asked Lupin. 

“A dementor,” said Lupin, who was now giving 
chocolate to everyone else. “One of the dementors of 
Azkaban.” 

Everyone stared at him. Professor Lupin crumpled up 
the empty chocolate wrapper and put it in his pocket. 

“Eat,” he repeated. “It’ll help. I need to speak to the 
driver, excuse me ...” 

He strolled past Harry and disappeared into the 
corridor. 

“Are you sure you’re okay, Harry?” said Hermione, 
watching Harry anxiously. 

“I don’t get it. ... What happened?” said Harry, wiping 
more sweat off his face. 

“Well — that thing — the dementor — stood there and 
looked around (I mean, I think it did, I couldn’t see its 
face) — and you — you — ” 



Page | 94 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I thought you were having a fit or something,” said 
Ron, who still looked scared. “You went sort of rigid 
and fell out of your seat and started twitching — ” 

“And Professor Lupin stepped over you, and walked 
toward the dementor, and pulled out his wand,” said 
Hermione, “and he said, ‘None of us is hiding Sirius 
Black under our cloaks. Go.’ But the dementor didn’t 
move, so Lupin muttered something, and a silvery 
thing shot out of his wand at it, and it turned around 
and sort of glided away. ...” 

“It was horrible,” said Neville, in a higher voice than 
usual. “Did you feel how cold it got when it came in?” 

“I felt weird,” said Ron, shifting his shoulders 
uncomfortably. “Like I’d never be cheerful again. ...” 

Ginny, who was huddled in her corner looking nearly 
as bad as Harry felt, gave a small sob; Hermione went 
over and put a comforting arm around her. 

“But didn’t any of you — fall off your seats?” said 
Harry awkwardly. 

“No,” said Ron, looking anxiously at Harry again. 
“Ginny was shaking like mad, though. ...” 

Harry didn’t understand. He felt weak and shivery, as 
though he were recovering from a bad bout of flu; he 
also felt the beginnings of shame. Why had he gone to 
pieces like that, when no one else had? 

Professor Lupin had come back. He paused as he 
entered, looked around, and said, with a small smile, 
“I haven’t poisoned that chocolate, you know. ...” 



Page | 95 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry took a bite and to his great surprise felt 
warmth spread suddenly to the tips of his fingers and 
toes. 

“Well be at Hogwarts in ten minutes,” said Professor 
Lupin. “Are you all right, Harry?” 

Harry didn’t ask how Professor Lupin knew his name. 

“Fine,” he muttered, embarrassed. 

They didn’t talk much during the remainder of the 
journey. At long last, the train stopped at Hogsmeade 
station, and there was a great scramble to get 
outside; owls hooted, cats meowed, and Neville’s pet 
toad croaked loudly from under his hat. It was 
freezing on the tiny platform; rain was driving down 
in icy sheets. 

“Firs’ years this way!” called a familiar voice. Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione turned and saw the gigantic 
outline of Hagrid at the other end of the platform, 
beckoning the terrified-looking new students forward 
for their traditional journey across the lake. 

“All righ’, you three?” Hagrid yelled over the heads of 
the crowd. They waved at him, but had no chance to 
speak to him because the mass of people around 
them was shunting them away along the platform. 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione followed the rest of the 
school along the platform and out onto a rough mud 
track, where at least a hundred stagecoaches awaited 
the remaining students, each pulled, Harry could only 
assume, by an invisible horse, because when they 
climbed inside and shut the door, the coach set off all 
by itself, bumping and swaying in procession. 

The coach smelled faintly of mold and straw. Harry 
felt better since the chocolate, but still weak. Ron and 

Page | 96 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione kept looking at him sideways, as though 
frightened he might collapse again. 

As the carriage trundled toward a pair of magnificent 
wrought iron gates, flanked with stone columns 
topped with winged boars, Harry saw two more 
towering, hooded dementors, standing guard on 
either side. A wave of cold sickness threatened to 
engulf him again; he leaned back into the lumpy seat 
and closed his eyes until they had passed the gates. 
The carriage picked up speed on the long, sloping 
drive up to the castle; Hermione was leaning out of 
the tiny window, watching the many turrets and 
towers draw nearer. At last, the carriage swayed to a 
halt, and Hermione and Ron got out. 

As Harry stepped down, a drawling, delighted voice 
sounded in his ear. 

“You fainted, Potter? Is Longbottom telling the truth? 
You actually fainted?” 

Malfoy elbowed past Hermione to block Harry’s way 
up the stone steps to the castle, his face gleeful and 
his pale eyes glinting maliciously. 

“Shove off, Malfoy,” said Ron, whose jaw was 
clenched. 

“Did you faint as well, Weasley?” said Malfoy loudly. 
“Did the scary old dementor frighten you too, 
Weasley?” 

“Is there a problem?” said a mild voice. Professor 
Lupin had just gotten out of the next carriage. 

Malfoy gave Professor Lupin an insolent stare, which 
took in the patches on his robes and the delapidated 
suitcase. With a tiny hint of sarcasm in his voice, he 

Page | 97 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




said, “Oh, no — er — Professor,” then he smirked at 
Crabbe and Goyle and led them up the steps into the 
castle. 

Hermione prodded Ron in the back to make him 
hurry, and the three of them joined the crowd 
swarming up the steps, through the giant oak front 
doors, into the cavernous entrance hall, which was lit 
with flaming torches, and housed a magnificent 
marble staircase that led to the upper floors. 

The door into the Great Hall stood open at the right; 
Harry followed the crowd toward it, but had barely 
glimpsed the enchanted ceiling, which was black and 
cloudy tonight, when a voice called, “Potter! Granger! 

I want to see you both!” 

Harry and Hermione turned around, surprised. 
Professor McGonagall, Transfiguration teacher and 
head of Gryffindor House, was calling over the heads 
of the crowd. She was a stern-looking witch who wore 
her hair in a tight bun; her sharp eyes were framed 
with square spectacles. Harry fought his way over to 
her with a feeling of foreboding: Professor McGonagall 
had a way of making him feel he must have done 
something wrong. 

“There’s no need to look so worried — I just want a 
word in my office,” she told them. “Move along there, 
Weasley.” 

Ron stared as Professor McGonagall ushered 
Harry and Hermione away from the chattering crowd; 
they accompanied her across the entrance hall, up 
the marble staircase, and along a corridor. 

Once they were in her office, a small room with a 
large, welcoming fire, Professor McGonagall motioned 
Harry and Hermione to sit down. She settled herself 

Page | 98 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




behind her desk and said abruptly, “Professor Lupin 
sent an owl ahead to say that you were taken ill on 
the train, Potter.” 

Before Harry could reply, there was a soft knock on 
the door and Madam Pomfrey, the nurse, came 
bustling in. 

Harry felt himself going red in the face. It was bad 
enough that he’d passed out, or whatever he had 
done, without everyone making all this fuss. 

“I’m fine,” he said, “I don’t need anything — ” 

“Oh, it’s you, is it?” said Madam Pomfrey, ignoring 
this and bending down to stare closely at him. “I 
suppose you’ve been doing something dangerous 
again?” 

“It was a dementor, Poppy,” said Professor 
McGonagall. 

They exchanged a dark look, and Madam Pomfrey 
clucked disapprovingly. 

“Setting dementors around a school,” she muttered, 
pushing back Harry’s hair and feeling his forehead. 
“He won’t be the last one who collapses. Yes, he’s all 
clammy. Terrible things, they are, and the effect they 
have on people who are already delicate — ” 

“I’m not delicate!” said Harry crossly. 

“Of course you’re not,” said Madam Pomfrey 
absentmindedly, now taking his pulse. 

“What does he need?” said Professor McGonagall 
crisply. “Bed rest? Should he perhaps spend tonight 
in the hospital wing?” 

Page | 99 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




‘Tm /ine!” said Harry, jumping up. The thought of 
what Draco Malfoy would say if he had to go to the 
hospital wing was torture. 

“Well, he should have some chocolate, at the very 
least,” said Madam Pomfrey, who was now trying to 
peer into Harry’s eyes. 

“I’ve already had some,” said Harry. “Professor Lupin 
gave me some. He gave it to all of us.” 

“Did he, now?” said Madam Pomfrey approvingly. “So 
we’ve finally got a Defense Against the Dark Arts 
teacher who knows his remedies?” 

“Are you sure you feel all right, Potter?” Professor 
McGonagall said sharply. 

“Yes,” said Harry. 

“Very well. Kindly wait outside while I have a quick 
word with Miss Granger about her course schedule, 
then we can go down to the feast together.” 

Harry went back into the corridor with Madam 
Pomfrey, who left for the hospital wing, muttering to 
herself. He had to wait only a few minutes; then 
Hermione emerged looking very happy about 
something, followed by Professor McGonagall, and the 
three of them made their way back down the marble 
staircase to the Great Hall. 

It was a sea of pointed black hats; each of the long 
House tables was lined with students, their faces 
glimmering by the light of thousands of candles, 
which were floating over the tables in midair. 

Professor Flitwick, who was a tiny little wizard with a 
shock of white hair, was carrying an ancient hat and 
a three-legged stool out of the hall. 

Page | 100 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh,” said Hermione softly, “we’ve missed the 
Sorting!” 

New students at Hogwarts were sorted into Houses by 
trying on the Sorting Hat, which shouted out the 
House they were best suited to (Gryffindor, 

Ravenclaw, Hufflepuff, or Slytherin). Professor 
McGonagall strode off toward her empty seat at the 
staff table, and Harry and Hermione set off in the 
other direction, as quietly as possible, toward the 
Gryffindor table. People looked around at them as 
they passed along the back of the hall, and a few of 
them pointed at Harry. Had the story of his collapsing 
in front of the dementor traveled that fast? 

He and Hermione sat down on either side of Ron, who 
had saved them seats. 

“What was all that about?” he muttered to Harry. 

Harry started to explain in a whisper, but at that 
moment the headmaster stood up to speak, and he 
broke off. 

Professor Dumbledore, though very old, always gave 
an impression of great energy. He had several feet of 
long silver hair and beard, half-moon spectacles, and 
an extremely crooked nose. He was often described as 
the greatest wizard of the age, but that wasn’t why 
Harry respected him. You couldn’t help trusting Albus 
Dumbledore, and as Harry watched him beaming 
around at the students, he felt really calm for the first 
time since the dementor had entered the train 
compartment. 

“Welcome!” said Dumbledore, the candlelight 
shimmering on his beard. “Welcome to another year 
at Hogwarts! I have a few things to say to you all, and 
as one of them is very serious, I think it best to get it 

Page | 101 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




out of the way before you become befuddled by our 
excellent feast. ...” 

Dumbledore cleared his throat and continued, “As 
you will all be aware after their search of the 
Hogwarts Express, our school is presently playing 
host to some of the dementors of Azkaban, who are 
here on Ministry of Magic business.” 

He paused, and Harry remembered what Mr. Weasley 
had said about Dumbledore not being happy with the 
dementors guarding the school. 

“They are stationed at every entrance to the grounds,” 
Dumbledore continued, “and while they are with us, I 
must make it plain that nobody is to leave school 
without permission. Dementors are not to be fooled 
by tricks or disguises — or even Invisibility Cloaks,” 
he added blandly, and Harry and Ron glanced at each 
other. “It is not in the nature of a dementor to 
understand pleading or excuses. I therefore warn 
each and every one of you to give them no reason to 
harm you. I look to the prefects, and our new Head 
Boy and Girl, to make sure that no student runs afoul 
of the dementors,” he said. 

Percy, who was sitting a few seats down from Harry, 
puffed out his chest again and stared around 
impressively. Dumbledore paused again; he looked 
very seriously around the hall, and nobody moved or 
made a sound. 

“On a happier note,” he continued, “I am pleased to 
welcome two new teachers to our ranks this year. 

“First, Professor Lupin, who has kindly consented to 
fill the post of Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher.” 



Page | 102 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




There was some scattered, rather unenthusiastic 
applause. Only those who had been in the 
compartment on the train with Professor Lupin 
clapped hard, Harry among them. Professor Lupin 
looked particularly shabby next to all the other 
teachers in their best robes. 

“Look at Snape!” Ron hissed in Harry’s ear. 

Professor Snape, the Potions master, was staring 
along the staff table at Professor Lupin. It was 
common knowledge that Snape wanted the Defense 
Against the Dark Arts job, but even Harry, who hated 
Snape, was startled at the expression twisting his 
thin, sallow face. It was beyond anger: it was loathing. 
Harry knew that expression only too well; it was the 
look Snape wore every time he set eyes on Harry. 

“As to our second new appointment,” Dumbledore 
continued as the lukewarm applause for Professor 
Lupin died away. “Well, I am sorry to tell you that 
Professor Kettleburn, our Care of Magical Creatures 
teacher, retired at the end of last year in order to 
enjoy more time with his remaining limbs. However, I 
am delighted to say that his place will be filled by 
none other than Rubeus Hagrid, who has agreed to 
take on this teaching job in addition to his 
gamekeeping duties.” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione stared at one another, 
stunned. Then they joined in with the applause, 
which was tumultuous at the Gryffindor table in 
particular. Harry leaned forward to see Hagrid, who 
was ruby-red in the face and staring down at his 
enormous hands, his wide grin hidden in the tangle of 
his black beard. 



Page | 103 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“We should’ve known!” Ron roared, pounding the 
table. “Who else would have assigned us a biting 
book?” 



Harry, Ron, and Hermione were the last to stop 
clapping, and as Professor Dumbledore started 
speaking again, they saw that Hagrid was wiping his 
eyes on the tablecloth. 

“Well, I think that’s everything of importance,” said 
Dumbledore. “Let the feast begin!” 

The golden plates and goblets before them filled 
suddenly with food and drink. Harry, suddenly 
ravenous, helped himself to everything he could reach 
and began to eat. 

It was a delicious feast; the hall echoed with talk, 
laughter, and the clatter of knives and forks. Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione, however, were eager for it to 
finish so that they could talk to Hagrid. They knew 
how much being made a teacher would mean to him. 
Hagrid wasn’t a fully qualified wizard; he had been 
expelled from Hogwarts in his third year for a crime 
he had not committed. It had been Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione who had cleared Hagrid ’s name last year. 

At long last, when the last morsels of pumpkin tart 
had melted from the golden platters, Dumbledore 
gave the word that it was time for them all to go to 
bed, and they got their chance. 

“Congratulations, Hagrid!” Hermione squealed as they 
reached the teachers’ table. 

“All down ter you three,” said Hagrid, wiping his 
shining face on his napkin as he looked up at them. 
“Can’ believe it ... great man, Dumbledore ... came 
straight down to me hut after Professor Kettleburn 

Page | 104 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




said he’d had enough. ... It’s what I always wanted. 



Overcome with emotion, he buried his face in his 
napkin, and Professor McGonagall shooed them away. 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione joined the Gryffindors 
streaming up the marble staircase and, very tired 
now, along more corridors, up more and more stairs, 
to the hidden entrance to Gryffindor Tower. A large 
portrait of a fat lady in a pink dress asked them, 
“Password?” 

“Coming through, coming through!” Percy called from 
behind the crowd. “The new password’s ‘Fortuna 
Major’!” 

“Oh no,” said Neville Longbottom sadly. He always 
had trouble remembering the passwords. 

Through the portrait hole and across the common 
room, the girls and boys divided toward their separate 
staircases. Harry climbed the spiral stair with no 
thought in his head except how glad he was to be 
back. They reached their familiar, circular dormitory 
with its five four-poster beds, and Harry, looking 
around, felt he was home at last. 



Page | 105 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 







TALONS AND TEA LEAVES 

When Harry, Ron, and Hermione entered the Great 
Hall for breakfast the next day, the first thing they 
saw was Draco Malfoy, who seemed to be entertaining 
a large group of Slytherins with a very funny story. As 
they passed, Malfoy did a ridiculous impression of a 
swooning fit and there was a roar of laughter. 

“Ignore him,” said Hermione, who was right behind 
Harry. “Just ignore him, it’s not worth it. ...” 

“Hey, Potter!” shrieked Pansy Parkinson, a Slytherin 
girl with a face like a pug. “Potter! The dementors are 
coming, Potter! Woooooooo!” 

Harry dropped into a seat at the Gryffindor table, next 
to George Weasley. 

“New third-year course schedules,” said George, 
passing them over. “What’s up with you, Harry?” 

“Malfoy,” said Ron, sitting down on George’s other 
side and glaring over at the Slytherin table. 

Page | 106 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



George looked up in time to see Malfoy pretending to 
faint with terror again. 

“That little git,” he said calmly. “He wasn’t so cocky 
last night when the dementors were down at our end 
of the train. Came running into our compartment, 
didn’t he, Fred?” 

“Nearly wet himself,” said Fred, with a contemptuous 
glance at Malfoy. 

“I wasn’t too happy myself,” said George. “They’re 
horrible things, those dementors. ...” 

“Sort of freeze your insides, don’t they?” said Fred. 

“You didn’t pass out, though, did you?” said Harry in 
a low voice. 

“Forget it, Harry,” said George bracingly. “Dad had to 
go out to Azkaban one time, remember, Fred? And he 
said it was the worst place he’d ever been, he came 
back all weak and shaking. . . . They suck the 
happiness out of a place, dementors. Most of the 
prisoners go mad in there.” 

“Anyway, we’ll see how happy Malfoy looks after our 
first Quidditch match,” said Fred. “Gryffindor versus 
Slytherin, first game of the season, remember?” 

The only time Harry and Malfoy had faced each other 
in a Quidditch match, Malfoy had definitely come off 
worse. Feeling slightly more cheerful, Harry helped 
himself to sausages and fried tomatoes. 

Hermione was examining her new schedule. 

“Ooh, good, we’re starting some new subjects today,” 
she said happily. 

Page | 107 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Hermione,” said Ron, frowning as he looked over her 
shoulder, “they’ve messed up your schedule. Look — 
they’ve got you down for about ten subjects a day. 
There isn’t enough time.” 

“I’ll manage. I’ve fixed it all with Professor 
McGonagall.” 

“But look,” said Ron, laughing, “see this morning? 
Nine o’clock, Divination. And underneath, nine 
o’clock, Muggle Studies. And” — Ron leaned closer to 
the schedule, disbelieving — “ look — underneath 
that, Arithmancy, nine o’clock. I mean, I know you’re 
good, Hermione, but no one’s that good. How’re you 
supposed to be in three classes at once?” 

“Don’t be silly,” said Hermione shortly. “Of course I 
won’t be in three classes at once.” 

“Well, then — ” 

“Pass the marmalade,” said Hermione. 

“But — ” 

“Oh, Ron, what’s it to you if my schedule’s a bit full?” 
Hermione snapped. “I told you, I’ve fixed it all with 
Professor McGonagall.” 

Just then, Hagrid entered the Great Hall. He was 
wearing his long moleskin overcoat and was 
absentmindedly swinging a dead polecat from one 
enormous hand. 

“All righ’?” he said eagerly, pausing on the way to the 
staff table. “Yer in my firs’ ever lesson! Right after 
lunch! Bin up since five gettin’ everythin’ ready. ... 
Hope it’s okay. ... Me, a teacher ... hones’ly. ...” 



Page | 108 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He grinned broadly at them and headed off to the 
staff table, still swinging the polecat. 

“Wonder what he’s been getting ready?” said Ron, a 
note of anxiety in his voice. 

The hall was starting to empty as people headed off 
toward their first lesson. Ron checked his course 
schedule. 

“We’d better go, look, Divination’s at the top of North 
Tower. It’ll take us ten minutes to get there. ...” 

They finished their breakfasts hastily, said good-bye 
to Fred and George, and walked back through the 
hall. As they passed the Slytherin table, Malfoy did 
yet another impression of a fainting fit. The shouts of 
laughter followed Harry into the entrance hall. 

The journey through the castle to North Tower was a 
long one. Two years at Hogwarts hadn’t taught them 
everything about the castle, and they had never been 
inside North Tower before. 

“There’s — got — to — be — a — shortcut,” Ron 
panted as they climbed their seventh long staircase 
and emerged on an unfamiliar landing, where there 
was nothing but a large painting of a bare stretch of 
grass hanging on the stone wall. 

“I think it’s this way,” said Hermione, peering down 
the empty passage to the right. 

“Can’t be,” said Ron. “That’s south, look, you can see 
a bit of the lake out of the window ...” 

Harry was watching the painting. A fat, dapple-gray 
pony had just ambled onto the grass and was grazing 
nonchalantly. Harry was used to the subjects of 

Page | 109 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hogwarts paintings moving around and leaving their 
frames to visit one another, but he always enjoyed 
watching it. A moment later, a short, squat knight in 
a suit of armor clanked into the picture after his 
pony. By the look of the grass stains on his metal 
knees, he had just fallen off. 

“Aha!” he yelled, seeing Harry, Ron, and Hermione. 
“What villains are these, that trespass upon my 
private lands! Come to scorn at my fall, perchance? 
Draw, you knaves, you dogs!” 

They watched in astonishment as the little knight 
tugged his sword out of its scabbard and began 
brandishing it violently, hopping up and down in 
rage. But the sword was too long for him; a 
particularly wild swing made him overbalance, and he 
landed facedown in the grass. 

“Are you all right?” said Harry, moving closer to the 
picture. 

“Get back, you scurvy braggart! Back, you rogue!” 

The knight seized his sword again and used it to push 
himself back up, but the blade sank deeply into the 
grass and, though he pulled with all his might, he 
couldn’t get it out again. Finally, he had to flop back 
down onto the grass and push up his visor to mop his 
sweating face. 

“Listen,” said Harry, taking advantage of the knight’s 
exhaustion, “we’re looking for the North Tower. You 
don’t know the way, do you?” 

“A quest!” The knight’s rage seemed to vanish 
instantly. He clanked to his feet and shouted, “Come 
follow me, dear friends, and we shall find our goal, or 
else shall perish bravely in the charge!” 

Page | 110 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He gave the sword another fruitless tug, tried and 
failed to mount the fat pony, gave up, and cried, “On 
foot then, good sirs and gentle lady! On! On!” 

And he ran, clanking loudly, into the left side of the 
frame and out of sight. 

They hurried after him along the corridor, following 
the sound of his armor. Every now and then they 
spotted him running through a picture ahead. 

“Be of stout heart, the worst is yet to come!” yelled the 
knight, and they saw him reappear in front of an 
alarmed group of women in crinolines, whose picture 
hung on the wall of a narrow spiral staircase. 

Puffing loudly, Harry, Ron, and Hermione climbed the 
tightly spiraling steps, getting dizzier and dizzier, 
until at last they heard the murmur of voices above 
them and knew they had reached the classroom. 

“Farewell!” cried the knight, popping his head into a 
painting of some sinister-looking monks. “Farewell, 
my comrades-in-arms! If ever you have need of noble 
heart and steely sinew, call upon Sir Cadogan!” 

“Yeah, well call you,” muttered Ron as the knight 
disappeared, “if we ever need someone mental.” 

They climbed the last few steps and emerged onto a 
tiny landing, where most of the class was already 
assembled. There were no doors off this landing, but 
Ron nudged Harry and pointed at the ceiling, where 
there was a circular trapdoor with a brass plaque on 
it. 

“ ‘Sibyll Trelawney, Divination teacher,’ ” Harry read. 
“How’re we supposed to get up there?” 



Page | 111 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




As though in answer to his question, the trapdoor 
suddenly opened, and a silvery ladder descended 
right at Harry’s feet. Everyone got quiet. 

“After you,” said Ron, grinning, so Harry climbed the 
ladder first. 

He emerged into the strangest-looking classroom he 
had ever seen. In fact, it didn’t look like a classroom 
at all, more like a cross between someone’s attic and 
an old-fashioned tea shop. At least twenty small, 
circular tables were crammed inside it, all 
surrounded by chintz armchairs and fat little poufs. 
Everything was lit with a dim, crimson light; the 
curtains at the windows were all closed, and the 
many lamps were draped with dark red scarves. It 
was stiflingly warm, and the fire that was burning 
under the crowded mantelpiece was giving off a 
heavy, sickly sort of perfume as it heated a large 
copper kettle. The shelves running around the 
circular walls were crammed with dusty-looking 
feathers, stubs of candles, many packs of tattered 
playing cards, countless silvery crystal balls, and a 
huge array of teacups. 

Ron appeared at Harry’s shoulder as the class 
assembled around them, all talking in whispers. 

“Where is she?” Ron said. 

A voice came suddenly out of the shadows, a soft, 
misty sort of voice. 

“Welcome,” it said. “How nice to see you in the 
physical world at last.” 

Harry’s immediate impression was of a large, 
glittering insect. Professor Trelawney moved into the 
firelight, and they saw that she was very thin; her 

Page | 112 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




large glasses magnified her eyes to several times their 
natural size, and she was draped in a gauzy spangled 
shawl. Innumerable chains and beads hung around 
her spindly neck, and her arms and hands were 
encrusted with bangles and rings. 

“Sit, my children, sit,” she said, and they all climbed 
awkwardly into armchairs or sank onto poufs. Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione sat themselves around the same 
round table. 

“Welcome to Divination,” said Professor Trelawney, 
who had seated herself in a winged armchair in front 
of the fire. “My name is Professor Trelawney. You may 
not have seen me before. I find that descending too 
often into the hustle and bustle of the main school 
clouds my Inner Eye.” 

Nobody said anything to this extraordinary 
pronouncement. Professor Trelawney delicately 
rearranged her shawl and continued, “So you have 
chosen to study Divination, the most difficult of all 
magical arts. I must warn you at the outset that if 
you do not have the Sight, there is very little I will be 
able to teach you. Books can take you only so far in 
this field. ...” 

At these words, both Harry and Ron glanced, 
grinning, at Hermione, who looked startled at the 
news that books wouldn’t be much help in this 
subject. 

“Many witches and wizards, talented though they are 
in the area of loud bangs and smells and sudden 
disappearings, are yet unable to penetrate the veiled 
mysteries of the future,” Professor Trelawney went on, 
her enormous, gleaming eyes moving from face to 
nervous face. “It is a Gift granted to few. You, boy,” 



Page | 113 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




she said suddenly to Neville, who almost toppled off 
his pouf. “Is your grandmother well?” 



“I think so,” said Neville tremulously. 

“I wouldn’t be so sure if I were you, dear,” said 
Professor Trelawney, the firelight glinting on her long 
emerald earrings. Neville gulped. Professor Trelawney 
continued placidly. “We will be covering the basic 
methods of Divination this year. The first term will be 
devoted to reading the tea leaves. Next term we shall 
progress to palmistry. By the way, my dear,” she shot 
suddenly at Parvati Patil, “beware a red-haired man.” 

Parvati gave a startled look at Ron, who was right 
behind her, and edged her chair away from him. 

“In the second term,” Professor Trelawney went on, 

“we shall progress to the crystal ball — if we have 
finished with fire omens, that is. Unfortunately, 
classes will be disrupted in February by a nasty bout 
of flu. I myself will lose my voice. And around Easter, 
one of our number will leave us forever.” 

A very tense silence followed this pronouncement, but 
Professor Trelawney seemed unaware of it. 

“I wonder, dear,” she said to Lavender Brown, who 
was nearest and shrank back in her chair, “if you 
could pass me the largest silver teapot?” 

Lavender, looking relieved, stood up, took an 
enormous teapot from the shelf, and put it down on 
the table in front of Professor Trelawney. 

“Thank you, my dear. Incidentally, that thing you are 
dreading — it will happen on Friday the sixteenth of 
October.” 

Page | 114 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Lavender trembled. 



“Now, I want you all to divide into pairs. Collect a 
teacup from the shelf, come to me, and I will fill it. 
Then sit down and drink, drink until only the dregs 
remain. Swill these around the cup three times with 
the left hand, then turn the cup upside down on its 
saucer, wait for the last of the tea to drain away, then 
give your cup to your partner to read. You will 
interpret the patterns using pages five and six of 
Unfogging the Future. I shall move among you, helping 
and instructing. Oh, and dear” — she caught Neville 
by the arm as he made to stand up — “after you’ve 
broken your first cup, would you be so kind as to 
select one of the blue patterned ones? I’m rather 
attached to the pink.” 

Sure enough, Neville had no sooner reached the shelf 
of teacups when there was a tinkle of breaking china. 
Professor Trelawney swept over to him holding a 
dustpan and brush and said, “One of the blue ones, 
then, dear, if you wouldn’t mind ... thank you. ...” 

When Harry and Ron had had their teacups filled, 
they went back to their table and tried to drink the 
scalding tea quickly. They swilled the dregs around as 
Professor Trelawney had instructed, then drained the 
cups and swapped over. 

“Right,” said Ron as they both opened their books at 
pages five and six. “What can you see in mine?” 

“A load of soggy brown stuff,” said Harry. The heavily 
perfumed smoke in the room was making him feel 
sleepy and stupid. 

“Broaden your minds, my dears, and allow your eyes 
to see past the mundane!” Professor Trelawney cried 
through the gloom. 

Page | 115 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry tried to pull himself together. 

“Right, you’ve got a crooked sort of cross ...” He 
consulted Unfogging the Future. “That means you’re 
going to have ‘trials and suffering’ — sorry about that 
— but there’s a thing that could be the sun ... hang 
on ... that means ‘great happiness’ ... so you’re going 
to suffer but be very happy. ...” 

“You need your Inner Eye tested, if you ask me,” said 
Ron, and they both had to stifle their laughs as 
Professor Trelawney gazed in their direction. 

“My turn ...” Ron peered into Harry’s teacup, his 
forehead wrinkled with effort. “There’s a blob a bit like 
a bowler hat,” he said. “Maybe you’re going to work 
for the Ministry of Magic. ...” 

He turned the teacup the other way up. 

“But this way it looks more like an acorn. ... What’s 
that?” He scanned his copy of Unfogging the Future. “ 
‘A windfall, unexpected gold.’ Excellent, you can lend 
me some ... and there’s a thing here,” he turned the 
cup again, “that looks like an animal . . . yeah, if that 
was its head ... it looks like a hippo ... no, a sheep ...” 

Professor Trelawney whirled around as Harry let out a 
snort of laughter. 

“Let me see that, my dear,” she said reprovingly to 
Ron, sweeping over and snatching Harry’s cup from 
him. Everyone went quiet to watch. 

Professor Trelawney was staring into the teacup, 
rotating it counterclockwise. 

“The falcon ... my dear, you have a deadly enemy.” 



Page | 116 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“But everyone knows that,” said Hermione in a loud 
whisper. Professor Trelawney stared at her. 

“Well, they do,” said Hermione. “Everybody knows 
about Harry and You-Know-Who.” 

Harry and Ron stared at her with a mixture of 
amazement and admiration. They had never heard 
Hermione speak to a teacher like that before. 

Professor Trelawney chose not to reply. She lowered 
her huge eyes to Harry’s cup again and continued to 
turn it. 

“The club ... an attack. Dear, dear, this is not a happy 
cup. ...” 

“I thought that was a bowler hat,” said Ron 
sheepishly. 

“The skull ... danger in your path, my dear. ...” 

Everyone was staring, transfixed, at Professor 
Trelawney, who gave the cup a final turn, gasped, and 
then screamed. 

There was another tinkle of breaking china; Neville 
had smashed his second cup. Professor Trelawney 
sank into a vacant armchair, her glittering hand at 
her heart and her eyes closed. 

“My dear boy . . . my poor, dear boy ... no ... it is 
kinder not to say ... no ... don’t ask me. ...” 

“What is it, Professor?” said Dean Thomas at once. 
Everyone had got to their feet, and slowly they 
crowded around Harry and Ron’s table, pressing close 
to Professor Trelawney’s chair to get a good look at 
Harry’s cup. 



Page | 117 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“My dear,” Professor Trelawney’s huge eyes opened 
dramatically, “you have the Grim.” 



“The what?” said Harry. 

He could tell that he wasn’t the only one who didn’t 
understand; Dean Thomas shrugged at him and 
Lavender Brown looked puzzled, but nearly everybody 
else clapped their hands to their mouths in horror. 

“The Grim, my dear, the Grim!” cried Professor 
Trelawney, who looked shocked that Harry hadn’t 
understood. “The giant, spectral dog that haunts 
churchyards! My dear boy, it is an omen — the worst 
omen — of death .!” 

Harry’s stomach lurched. That dog on the cover of 
Death Omens in Flourish and Blotts — the dog in the 
shadows of Magnolia Crescent . . . Lavender Brown 
clapped her hands to her mouth too. Everyone was 
looking at Harry, everyone except Hermione, who had 
gotten up and moved around to the back of Professor 
Trelawney’s chair. 

“I don’t think it looks like a Grim,” she said flatly. 

Professor Trelawney surveyed Hermione with 
mounting dislike. 

“You’ll forgive me for saying so, my dear, but I 
perceive very little aura around you. Very little 
receptivity to the resonances of the future.” 

Seamus Finnigan was tilting his head from side to 
side. 

“It looks like a Grim if you do this,” he said, with his 
eyes almost shut, “but it looks more like a donkey 
from here,” he said, leaning to the left. 

Page | 118 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“When you’ve all finished deciding whether I’m going 
to die or not!” said Harry, taking even himself by 
surprise. Now nobody seemed to want to look at him. 

“I think we will leave the lesson here for today,” said 
Professor Trelawney in her mistiest voice. “Yes ... 
please pack away your things. ...” 

Silently the class took their teacups back to Professor 
Trelawney, packed away their books, and closed their 
bags. Even Ron was avoiding Harry’s eyes. 

“Until we meet again,” said Professor Trelawney 
faintly, “fair fortune be yours. Oh, and dear” — she 
pointed at Neville — “you’ll be late next time, so mind 
you work extra-hard to catch up.” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione descended Professor 
Trelawney’s ladder and the winding stair in silence, 
then set off for Professor McGonagall’s 
Transfiguration lesson. It took them so long to find 
her classroom that, early as they had left Divination, 
they were only just in time. 

Harry chose a seat right at the back of the room, 
feeling as though he were sitting in a very bright 
spotlight; the rest of the class kept shooting furtive 
glances at him, as though he were about to drop dead 
at any moment. He hardly heard what Professor 
McGonagall was telling them about Animagi (wizards 
who could transform at will into animals), and wasn’t 
even watching when she transformed herself in front 
of their eyes into a tabby cat with spectacle markings 
around her eyes. 

“Really, what has got into you all today?” said 
Professor McGonagall, turning back into herself with 
a faint pop, and staring around at them all. “Not that 



Page | 119 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




it matters, but that’s the first time my 
transformation’s not got applause from a class.” 



Everybody’s heads turned toward Harry again, but 
nobody spoke. Then Hermione raised her hand. 

“Please, Professor, we’ve just had our first Divination 
class, and we were reading the tea leaves, and — ” 

“Ah, of course,” said Professor McGonagall, suddenly 
frowning. “There is no need to say any more, Miss 
Granger. Tell me, which of you will be dying this 
year?” 

Everyone stared at her. 

“Me,” said Harry, finally. 

“I see,” said Professor McGonagall, fixing Harry with 
her beady eyes. “Then you should know, Potter, that 
Sibyll Trelawney has predicted the death of one 
student a year since she arrived at this school. None 
of them has died yet. Seeing death omens is her 
favorite way of greeting a new class. If it were not for 
the fact that I never speak ill of my colleagues — ” 

Professor McGonagall broke off, and they saw that her 
nostrils had gone white. She went on, more calmly, 
“Divination is one of the most imprecise branches of 
magic. I shall not conceal from you that I have very 
little patience with it. True Seers are very rare, and 
Professor Trelawney — ” 

She stopped again, and then said, in a very matter-of- 
fact tone, “You look in excellent health to me, Potter, 
so you will excuse me if I don’t let you off homework 
today. I assure you that if you die, you need not hand 
it in.” 

Page | 120 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione laughed. Harry felt a bit better. It was 
harder to feel scared of a lump of tea leaves away 
from the dim red light and befuddling perfume of 
Professor Trelawney’s classroom. Not everyone was 
convinced, however. Ron still looked worried, and 
Lavender whispered, “But what about Neville’s cup?” 

When the Transfiguration class had finished, they 
joined the crowd thundering toward the Great Hall for 
lunch. 

“Ron, cheer up,” said Hermione, pushing a dish of 
stew toward him. “You heard what Professor 
McGonagall said.” 

Ron spooned stew onto his plate and picked up his 
fork but didn’t start. 

“Harry,” he said, in a low, serious voice, “you haven’t 
seen a great black dog anywhere, have you?” 

“Yeah, I have,” said Harry. “I saw one the night I left 
the Dursleys’.” 

Ron let his fork fall with a clatter. 

“Probably a stray,” said Hermione calmly. 

Ron looked at Hermione as though she had gone 
mad. 

“Hermione, if Harry’s seen a Grim, that’s — that’s 
bad,” he said. “My — my uncle Bilius saw one and — 
and he died twenty-four hours later!” 

“Coincidence,” said Hermione airily, pouring herself 
some pumpkin juice. 



Page | 121 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You don’t know what you’re talking about!” said Ron, 
starting to get angry. “Grims scare the living daylights 
out of most wizards!” 

“There you are, then,” said Hermione in a superior 
tone. “They see the Grim and die of fright. The Grim’s 
not an omen, it’s the cause of death! And Harry’s still 
with us because he’s not stupid enough to see one 
and think, right, well, I’d better kick the bucket then!” 

Ron mouthed wordlessly at Hermione, who opened 
her bag, took out her new Arithmancy book, and 
propped it open against the juice jug. 

“I think Divination seems very woolly,” she said, 
searching for her page. “A lot of guesswork, if you ask 
me.” 

“There was nothing woolly about the Grim in that 
cup!” said Ron hotly. 

“You didn’t seem quite so confident when you were 
telling Harry it was a sheep,” said Hermione coolly. 

“Professor Trelawney said you didn’t have the right 
aura! You just don’t like being bad at something for a 
change!” 

He had touched a nerve. Hermione slammed her 
Arithmancy book down on the table so hard that bits 
of meat and carrot flew everywhere. 

“If being good at Divination means I have to pretend 
to see death omens in a lump of tea leaves, I’m not 
sure I’ll be studying it much longer! That lesson was 
absolute rubbish compared with my Arithmancy 
class!” 



She snatched up her bag and stalked away. 

Page | 122 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Ron frowned after her. 



“What’s she talking about?” he said to Harry. “She 
hasn’t been to an Arithmancy class yet.” 

Harry was pleased to get out of the castle after lunch. 
Yesterday’s rain had cleared; the sky was a clear, pale 
gray, and the grass was springy and damp underfoot 
as they set off for their first ever Care of Magical 
Creatures class. 

Ron and Hermione weren’t speaking to each other. 
Harry walked beside them in silence as they went 
down the sloping lawns to Hagrid’s hut on the edge of 
the Forbidden Forest. It was only when he spotted 
three only-too-familiar backs ahead of them that he 
realized they must be having these lessons with the 
Slytherins. Malfoy was talking animatedly to Crabbe 
and Goyle, who were chortling. Harry was quite sure 
he knew what they were talking about. 

Hagrid was waiting for his class at the door of his hut. 
He stood in his moleskin overcoat, with Fang the 
boarhound at his heels, looking impatient to start. 

“C’mon, now, get a move on!” he called as the class 
approached. “Got a real treat for yeh today! Great 
lesson cornin’ up! Everyone here? Right, follow me!” 

For one nasty moment, Harry thought that Hagrid 
was going to lead them into the forest; Harry had had 
enough unpleasant experiences in there to last him a 
lifetime. However, Hagrid strolled off around the edge 
of the trees, and five minutes later, they found 
themselves outside a kind of paddock. There was 
nothing in there. 



Page | 123 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Everyone gather ’round the fence here!” he called. 
“That’s it — make sure yeh can see — now, firs’ thing 
yeh’ll want ter do is open yer books — ” 

“How?” said the cold, drawling voice of Draco Malfoy. 

“Eh?” said Hagrid. 

“How do we open our books?” Malfoy repeated. He 
took out his copy of The Monster Book of Monsters, 
which he had bound shut with a length of rope. Other 
people took theirs out too; some, like Harry, had 
belted their book shut; others had crammed them 
inside tight bags or clamped them together with 
binder clips. 

“Hasn’ — hasn’ anyone bin able ter open their 
books?” said Hagrid, looking crestfallen. 

The class all shook their heads. 

“Yeh’ve got ter stroke ’em,” said Hagrid, as though 
this was the most obvious thing in the world. “Look — 



He took Hermione’s copy and ripped off the Spellotape 
that bound it. The book tried to bite, but Hagrid ran a 
giant forefinger down its spine, and the book 
shivered, and then fell open and lay quiet in his hand. 

“Oh, how silly we’ve all been!” Malfoy sneered. “We 
should have stroked them! Why didn’t we guess!” 

“I — I thought they were funny,” Hagrid said 
uncertainly to Hermione. 

“Oh, tremendously funny!” said Malfoy. “Really witty, 
giving us books that try and rip our hands off!” 



Page | 124 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Shut up, Malfoy,” said Harry quietly. Hagrid was 
looking downcast and Harry wanted Hagrid ’s first 
lesson to be a success. 

“Righ’ then,” said Hagrid, who seemed to have lost his 
thread, “so — so yeh’ve got yer books an’ — an’ — 
now yeh need the Magical Creatures. Yeah. So I’ll go 
an’ get ’em. Hang on ...” 

He strode away from them into the forest and out of 
sight. 

“God, this place is going to the dogs,” said Malfoy 
loudly. “That oaf teaching classes, my father’ll have a 
fit when I tell him — ” 

“Shut up, Malfoy,” Harry repeated. 

“Careful, Potter, there’s a dementor behind you — ” 

“Oooooooh!” squealed Lavender Brown, pointing 
toward the opposite side of the paddock. 

Trotting toward them were a dozen of the most bizarre 
creatures Harry had ever seen. They had the bodies, 
hind legs, and tails of horses, but the front legs, 
wings, and heads of what seemed to be giant eagles, 
with cruel, steel-colored beaks and large, brilliantly 
orange eyes. The talons on their front legs were half a 
foot long and deadly looking. Each of the beasts had a 
thick leather collar around its neck, which was 
attached to a long chain, and the ends of all of these 
were held in the vast hands of Hagrid, who came 
jogging into the paddock behind the creatures. 

“Gee up, there!” he roared, shaking the chains and 
urging the creatures toward the fence where the class 
stood. Everyone drew back slightly as Hagrid reached 
them and tethered the creatures to the fence. 

Page | 125 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Hippogriffs!” Hagrid roared happily, waving a hand at 
them. “Beau’iful, aren’ they?” 

Harry could sort of see what Hagrid meant. Once you 
got over the first shock of seeing something that was 
half horse, half bird, you started to appreciate the 
hippogriffs’ gleaming coats, changing smoothly from 
feather to hair, each of them a different color: stormy 
gray, bronze, pinkish roan, gleaming chestnut, and 
inky black. 

“So,” said Hagrid, rubbing his hands together and 
beaming around, “if yeh wan’ ter come a bit nearer — ” 

No one seemed to want to. Harry, Ron, and Hermione, 
however, approached the fence cautiously. 

“Now, firs’ thing yeh gotta know abou’ hippogriffs is, 
they’re proud,” said Hagrid. “Easily offended, 
hippogriffs are. Don’t never insult one, ’cause it might 
be the last thing yeh do.” 

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle weren’t listening; they 
were talking in an undertone and Harry had a nasty 
feeling they were plotting how best to disrupt the 
lesson. 

“Yeh always wait fer the hippogriff ter make the firs’ 
move,” Hagrid continued. “It’s polite, see? Yeh walk 
toward him, and yeh bow, an’ yeh wait. If he bows 
back, yeh’re allowed ter touch him. If he doesn’ bow, 
then get away from him sharpish, ’cause those talons 
hurt. 

“Right — who wants ter go first?” 

Most of the class backed farther away in answer. 

Even Harry, Ron, and Hermione had misgivings. The 
hippogriffs were tossing their fierce heads and flexing 

Page | 126 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




their powerful wings; they didn’t seem to like being 
tethered like this. 

“No one?” said Hagrid, with a pleading look. 

“I’ll do it,” said Harry. 

There was an intake of breath from behind him, and 
both Lavender and Parvati whispered, “Oooh, no, 
Harry, remember your tea leaves!” 

Harry ignored them. He climbed over the paddock 
fence. 

“Good man, Harry!” roared Hagrid. “Right then — let’s 
see how yeh get on with Buckbeak.” 

He untied one of the chains, pulled the gray hippogriff 
away from its fellows, and slipped off its leather 
collar. The class on the other side of the paddock 
seemed to be holding its breath. Malfoy’s eyes were 
narrowed maliciously. 

“Easy, now, Harry,” said Hagrid quietly. “Yeh’ve got 
eye contact, now try not ter blink. ... Hippogriffs don’ 
trust yeh if yeh blink too much. ...” 

Harry’s eyes immediately began to water, but he 
didn’t shut them. Buckbeak had turned his great, 
sharp head and was staring at Harry with one fierce 
orange eye. 

“Tha’s it,” said Hagrid. “Tha’s it, Harry ... now, bow 



Harry didn’t feel much like exposing the back of his 
neck to Buckbeak, but he did as he was told. He gave 
a short bow and then looked up. 



Page | 127 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The hippogriff was still staring haughtily at him. It 
didn’t move. 

“Ah,” said Hagrid, sounding worried. “Right — back 
away, now, Harry, easy does it — ” 

But then, to Harry’s enormous surprise, the hippogriff 
suddenly bent its scaly front knees and sank into 
what was an unmistakable bow. 

“Well done, Harry!” said Hagrid, ecstatic. “Right — 
yeh can touch him! Pat his beak, go on!” 

Feeling that a better reward would have been to back 
away, Harry moved slowly toward the hippogriff and 
reached out toward it. He patted the beak several 
times and the hippogriff closed its eyes lazily, as 
though enjoying it. 

The class broke into applause, all except for Malfoy, 
Crabbe, and Goyle, who were looking deeply 
disappointed. 

“Righ’ then, Harry,” said Hagrid. “I reckon he might’ 
let yeh ride him!” 

This was more than Harry had bargained for. He was 
used to a broomstick; but he wasn’t sure a hippogriff 
would be quite the same. 

“Yeh climb up there, jus’ behind the wing joint,” said 
Hagrid, “an’ mind yeh don’ pull any of his feathers 
out, he won’ like that. ...” 

Harry put his foot on the top of Buckbeak’s wing and 
hoisted himself onto its back. Buckbeak stood up. 
Harry wasn’t sure where to hold on; everything in 
front of him was covered with feathers. 



Page | 128 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Go on, then!” roared Hagrid, slapping the hippogriff’s 
hindquarters. 

Without warning, twelve-foot wings flapped open on 
either side of Harry; he just had time to seize the 
hippogriff around the neck before he was soaring 
upward. It was nothing like a broomstick, and Harry 
knew which one he preferred; the hippogriff’s wings 
beat uncomfortably on either side of him, catching 
him under his legs and making him feel he was about 
to be thrown off; the glossy feathers slipped under his 
fingers and he didn’t dare get a stronger grip; instead 
of the smooth action of his Nimbus Two Thousand, he 
now felt himself rocking backward and forward as the 
hindquarters of the hippogriff rose and fell with its 
wings. 

Buckbeak flew him once around the paddock and 
then headed back to the ground; this was the bit 
Harry had been dreading; he leaned back as the 
smooth neck lowered, feeling he was going to slip off 
over the beak, then felt a heavy thud as the four ill- 
assorted feet hit the ground. He just managed to hold 
on and push himself straight again. 

“Good work, Harry!” roared Hagrid as everyone except 
Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle cheered. “Okay, who else 
wants a go?” 

Emboldened by Harry’s success, the rest of the class 
climbed cautiously into the paddock. Hagrid untied 
the hippogriffs one by one, and soon people were 
bowing nervously, all over the paddock. Neville ran 
repeatedly backward from his, which didn’t seem to 
want to bend its knees. Ron and Hermione practiced 
on the chestnut, while Harry watched. 



Page | 129 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle had taken over Buckbeak. 
He had bowed to Malfoy, who was now patting his 
beak, looking disdainful. 

“This is very easy,” Malfoy drawled, loud enough for 
Harry to hear him. “I knew it must have been, if 
Potter could do it. ... I bet you’re not dangerous at all, 
are you?” he said to the hippogriff. “Are you, you great 
ugly brute?” 

It happened in a flash of steely talons; Malfoy let out a 
high-pitched scream and next moment, Hagrid was 
wrestling Buckbeak back into his collar as he 
strained to get at Malfoy, who lay curled in the grass, 
blood blossoming over his robes. 

“I’m dying!” Malfoy yelled as the class panicked. “I’m 
dying, look at me! It’s killed me!” 

“Yer not dyin’!” said Hagrid, who had gone very white. 
“Someone help me — gotta get him outta here — ” 

Hermione ran to hold open the gate as Hagrid lifted 
Malfoy easily. As they passed, Harry saw that there 
was a long, deep gash on Malfoy’s arm; blood 
splattered the grass and Hagrid ran with him, up the 
slope toward the castle. 

Very shaken, the Care of Magical Creatures class 
followed at a walk. The Slytherins were all shouting 
about Hagrid. 

“They should fire him straight away!” said Pansy 
Parkinson, who was in tears. 

“It was Malfoy’s fault!” snapped Dean Thomas. 

Crabbe and Goyle flexed their muscles threateningly. 



Page | 130 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




They all climbed the stone steps into the deserted 
entrance hall. 

“I’m going to see if he’s okay!” said Pansy, and they all 
watched her run up the marble staircase. The 
Slytherins, still muttering about Hagrid, headed away 
in the direction of their dungeon common room; 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione proceeded upstairs to 
Gryffindor Tower. 

“D’you think he’ll be all right?” said Hermione 
nervously. 

“ ’Course he will. Madam Pomfrey can mend cuts in 
about a second,” said Harry, who had had far worse 
injuries mended magically by the nurse. 

“That was a really bad thing to happen in Hagrid ’s 
first class, though, wasn’t it?” said Ron, looking 
worried. “Trust Malfoy to mess things up for him. ...” 

They were among the first to reach the Great Hall at 
dinnertime, hoping to see Hagrid, but he wasn’t there. 

“They wouldn’t fire him, would they?” said Hermione 
anxiously, not touching her steak-and-kidney 
pudding. 

“They’d better not,” said Ron, who wasn’t eating 
either. 

Harry was watching the Slytherin table. A large group 
including Crabbe and Goyle was huddled together, 
deep in conversation. Harry was sure they were 
cooking up their own version of how Malfoy had been 
injured. 

“Well, you can’t say it wasn’t an interesting first day 
back,” said Ron gloomily. 

Page | 131 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




They went up to the crowded Gryffindor common 
room after dinner and tried to do the homework 
Professor McGonagall had given them, but all three of 
them kept breaking off and glancing out of the tower 
window. 

“There’s a light on in Hagrid’s window,” Harry said 
suddenly. 

Ron looked at his watch. 

“If we hurried, we could go down and see him. It’s still 
quite early. ...” 

“I don’t know,” Hermione said slowly, and Harry saw 
her glance at him. 

“I’m allowed to walk across the grounds,” he said 
pointedly. “Sirius Black hasn’t got past the dementors 
yet, has he?” 

So they put their things away and headed out of the 
portrait hole, glad to meet nobody on their way to the 
front doors, as they weren’t entirely sure they were 
supposed to be out. 

The grass was still wet and looked almost black in the 
twilight. When they reached Hagrid’s hut, they 
knocked, and a voice growled, “C’min.” 

Hagrid was sitting in his shirtsleeves at his scrubbed 
wooden table; his boarhound, Fang, had his head in 
Hagrid’s lap. One look told them that Hagrid had been 
drinking a lot; there was a pewter tankard almost as 
big as a bucket in front of him, and he seemed to be 
having difficulty getting them into focus. 



Page | 132 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ ’Spect it’s a record,” he said thickly, when he 
recognized them. “Don’ reckon they’ve ever had a 
teacher who lasted on’y a day before.” 

“You haven’t been fired, Hagrid!” gasped Hermione. 

“Not yet,” said Hagrid miserably, taking a huge gulp 
of whatever was in the tankard. “But ’s only a matter 
o’ time, i’n’t it, after Malfoy ...” 

“How is he?” said Ron as they all sat down. “It wasn’t 
serious, was it?” 

“Madam Pomfrey fixed him best she could,” said 
Hagrid dully, “but he’s sayin’ it’s still agony ... covered 
in bandages ... moanin’ ...” 

“He’s faking it,” said Harry at once. “Madam Pomfrey 
can mend anything. She regrew half my bones last 
year. Trust Malfoy to milk it for all it’s worth.” 

“School gov’nors have bin told, o’ course,” said Hagrid 
miserably. “They reckon I started too big. Shoulda left 
hippogriffs fer later ... done flobberworms or summat. 
... Jus’ thought it’d make a good firs’ lesson. ... ’S all 
my fault. ...” 

“It’s all Malfoy ’s fault, Hagrid!” said Hermione 
earnestly. 

“We’re witnesses,” said Harry. “You said hippogriffs 
attack if you insult them. It’s Malfoy’s problem that 
he wasn’t listening. We’ll tell Dumbledore what really 
happened.” 

“Yeah, don’t worry, Hagrid, we’ll back you up,” said 
Ron. 



Page | 133 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Tears leaked out of the crinkled corners of Hagrid ’s 
beetle-black eyes. He grabbed both Harry and Ron 
and pulled them into a bone-breaking hug. 

“I think you’ve had enough to drink, Hagrid,” said 
Hermione firmly. She took the tankard from the table 
and went outside to empty it. 

“Ar, maybe she’s right,” said Hagrid, letting go of 
Harry and Ron, who both staggered away, rubbing 
their ribs. Hagrid heaved himself out of his chair and 
followed Hermione unsteadily outside. They heard a 
loud splash. 

“What’s he done?” said Harry nervously as Hermione 
came back in with the empty tankard. 

“Stuck his head in the water barrel,” said Hermione, 
putting the tankard away. 

Hagrid came back, his long hair and beard sopping 
wet, wiping the water out of his eyes. 

“Tha’s better,” he said, shaking his head like a dog 
and drenching them all. “Listen, it was good of yeh ter 
come an’ see me, I really — ” 

Hagrid stopped dead, staring at Harry as though he’d 
only just realized he was there. 

“WHAT DYEH THINK YOU’RE DOIN’, EH?” he roared, 
so suddenly that they jumped a foot in the air. 

“YEH ’RE NOT TO GO WANDERIN’ AROUND AFTER 
DARK, HARRY! AN’ YOU TWO! LETTIN’ HIM!” 

Hagrid strode over to Harry, grabbed his arm, and 
pulled him to the door. 



Page | 134 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“C’mon!” Hagrid said angrily. “I’m takin’yer all back 
up ter school, an’ don’ let me catch yeh walkin’ down 
ter see me after dark again. I’m not worth that!” 



Page | 135 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




7 




THE BOGGART IN THE WARDROBE 

Malfoy didn’t reappear in classes until late on 
Thursday morning, when the Slytherins and 
Gryffindors were halfway through double Potions. He 
swaggered into the dungeon, his right arm covered in 
bandages and bound up in a sling, acting, in Harry’s 
opinion, as though he were the heroic survivor of 
some dreadful battle. 

“How is it, Draco?” simpered Pansy Parkinson. “Does 
it hurt much?” 

“Yeah,” said Malfoy, putting on a brave sort of 
grimace. But Harry saw him wink at Crabbe and 
Goyle when Pansy had looked away. 

“Settle down, settle down,” said Professor Snape idly. 

Harry and Ron scowled at each other; Snape wouldn’t 
have said “settle down” if they’d walked in late, he’d 
have given them detention. But Malfoy had always 
been able to get away with anything in Snape ’s 

Page | 136 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



classes; Snape was head of Slytherin House, and 
generally favored his own students above all others. 



They were making a new potion today, a Shrinking 
Solution. Malfoy set up his cauldron right next to 
Harry and Ron, so that they were preparing their 
ingredients on the same table. 

“Sir,” Malfoy called, “sir, I’ll need help cutting up 
these daisy roots, because of my arm — ” 

“Weasley, cut up Malfoy’s roots for him,” said Snape 
without looking up. 

Ron went brick red. 

“There’s nothing wrong with your arm,” he hissed at 
Malfoy. 

Malfoy smirked across the table. 

“Weasley, you heard Professor Snape; cut up these 
roots.” 

Ron seized his knife, pulled Malfoy’s roots toward 
him, and began to chop them roughly, so that they 
were all different sizes. 

“Professor,” drawled Malfoy, “Weasley’s mutilating my 
roots, sir.” 

Snape approached their table, stared down his 
hooked nose at the roots, then gave Ron an 
unpleasant smile from beneath his long, greasy black 
hair. 

“Change roots with Malfoy, Weasley.” 

“But, sir — !” 

Page | 137 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Ron had spent the last quarter of an hour carefully 
shredding his own roots into exactly equal pieces. 

“Now,” said Snape in his most dangerous voice. 

Ron shoved his own beautifully cut roots across the 
table at Malfoy, then took up the knife again. 

“And, sir, 111 need this shrivelfig skinned,” said 
Malfoy, his voice full of malicious laughter. 

“Potter, you can skin Malfoy’s shrivelfig,” said Snape, 
giving Harry the look of loathing he always reserved 
just for him. 

Harry took Malfoy’s shrivelfig as Ron began trying to 
repair the damage to the roots he now had to use. 
Harry skinned the shrivelfig as fast as he could and 
flung it back across the table at Malfoy without 
speaking. Malfoy was smirking more broadly than 
ever. 

“Seen your pal Hagrid lately?” he asked them quietly. 

“None of your business,” said Ron jerkily, without 
looking up. 

“I’m afraid he won’t be a teacher much longer,” said 
Malfoy in a tone of mock sorrow. “Father’s not very 
happy about my injury — ” 

“Keep talking, Malfoy, and I’ll give you a real injury,” 
snarled Ron. 

“ — he’s complained to the school governors. And to 
the Ministry of Magic. Father’s got a lot of influence, 
you know. And a lasting injury like this” — he gave a 
huge, fake sigh — “who knows if my arm’ll ever be the 
same again?” 

Page | 138 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“So that’s why you’re putting it on,” said Harry, 
accidentally beheading a dead caterpillar because his 
hand was shaking in anger. “To try to get Hagrid 
fired.” 

“Well,” said Malfoy, lowering his voice to a whisper, 

“ partly , Potter. But there are other benefits too. 
Weasley, slice my caterpillars for me.” 

A few cauldrons away, Neville was in trouble. Neville 
regularly went to pieces in Potions lessons; it was his 
worst subject, and his great fear of Professor Snape 
made things ten times worse. His potion, which was 
supposed to be a bright, acid green, had turned — 

“Orange, Longbottom,” said Snape, ladling some up 
and allowing it to splash back into the cauldron, so 
that everyone could see. “Orange. Tell me, boy, does 
anything penetrate that thick skull of yours? Didn’t 
you hear me say, quite clearly, that only one rat 
spleen was needed? Didn’t I state plainly that a dash 
of leech juice would suffice? What do I have to do to 
make you understand, Longbottom?” 

Neville was pink and trembling. He looked as though 
he was on the verge of tears. 

“Please, sir,” said Hermione, “please, I could help 
Neville put it right — ” 

“I don’t remember asking you to show off, Miss 
Granger,” said Snape coldly, and Hermione went as 
pink as Neville. “Longbottom, at the end of this lesson 
we will feed a few drops of this potion to your toad 
and see what happens. Perhaps that will encourage 
you to do it properly.” 

Snape moved away, leaving Neville breathless with 
fear. 

Page | 139 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Help me!” he moaned to Hermione. 



“Hey, Harry,” said Seamus Finnigan, leaning over to 
borrow Harry’s brass scales, “have you heard? Daily 
Prophet this morning — they reckon Sirius Black’s 
been sighted.” 

“Where?” said Harry and Ron quickly. On the other 
side of the table, Malfoy looked up, listening closely. 

“Not too far from here,” said Seamus, who looked 
excited. “It was a Muggle who saw him. ’Course, she 
didn’t really understand. The Muggles think he’s just 
an ordinary criminal, don’t they? So she phoned the 
telephone hot line. By the time the Ministry of Magic 
got there, he was gone.” 

“Not too far from here ... ,” Ron repeated, looking 
significantly at Harry. He turned around and saw 
Malfoy watching closely. “What, Malfoy? Need 
something else skinned?” 

But Malfoy’s eyes were shining malevolently, and they 
were fixed on Harry. He leaned across the table. 

“Thinking of trying to catch Black single-handed, 
Potter?” 

“Yeah, that’s right,” said Harry offhandedly. 

Malfoy’s thin mouth was curving in a mean smile. 

“Of course, if it was me,” he said quietly, “I’d have 
done something before now. I wouldn’t be staying in 
school like a good boy, I’d be out there looking for 
him.” 

“What are you talking about, Malfoy?” said Ron 
roughly. 

Page | 140 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t you know, Potter?” breathed Malfoy, his pale 
eyes narrowed. 



“Know what?” 

Malfoy let out a low, sneering laugh. 

“Maybe you’d rather not risk your neck,” he said. 
“Want to leave it to the dementors, do you? But if it 
was me, I’d want revenge. I’d hunt him down myself.” 

“ What are you talking about?” said Harry angrily, but 
at that moment Snape called, “You should have 
finished adding your ingredients by now; this potion 
needs to stew before it can be drunk, so clear away 
while it simmers and then we’ll test Longbottom’s. ...” 

Crabbe and Goyle laughed openly, watching Neville 
sweat as he stirred his potion feverishly. Hermione 
was muttering instructions to him out of the corner of 
her mouth, so that Snape wouldn’t see. Harry and 
Ron packed away their unused ingredients and went 
to wash their hands and ladles in the stone basin in 
the corner. 

“What did Malfoy mean?” Harry muttered to Ron as 
he stuck his hands under the icy jet that poured from 
the gargoyle’s mouth. “Why would I want revenge on 
Black? He hasn’t done anything to me — yet.” 

“He’s making it up,” said Ron savagely. “He’s trying to 
make you do something stupid. ...” 

The end of the lesson in sight, Snape strode over to 
Neville, who was cowering by his cauldron. 

“Everyone gather ’round,” said Snape, his black eyes 
glittering, “and watch what happens to Longbottom’s 
toad. If he has managed to produce a Shrinking 

Page | 141 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Solution, it will shrink to a tadpole. If, as I don’t 
doubt, he has done it wrong, his toad is likely to be 
poisoned.” 

The Gryffindors watched fearfully. The Slytherins 
looked excited. Snape picked up Trevor the toad in 
his left hand and dipped a small spoon into Neville’s 
potion, which was now green. He trickled a few drops 
down Trevor’s throat. 

There was a moment of hushed silence, in which 
Trevor gulped; then there was a small pop, and Trevor 
the tadpole was wriggling in Snape ’s palm. 

The Gryffindors burst into applause. Snape, looking 
sour, pulled a small bottle from the pocket of his 
robe, poured a few drops on top of Trevor, and he 
reappeared suddenly, fully grown. 

“Five points from Gryffindor,” said Snape, which 
wiped the smiles from every face. “I told you not to 
help him, Miss Granger. Class dismissed.” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione climbed the steps to the 
entrance hall. Harry was still thinking about what 
Malfoy had said, while Ron was seething about 
Snape. 

“Five points from Gryffindor because the potion was 
all right! Why didn’t you lie, Hermione? You should’ve 
said Neville did it all by himself!” 

Hermione didn’t answer. Ron looked around. 

“Where is she?” 

Harry turned too. They were at the top of the steps 
now, watching the rest of the class pass them, 
heading for the Great Hall and lunch. 

Page | 142 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“She was right behind us,” said Ron, frowning. 

Malfoy passed them, walking between Crabbe and 
Goyle. He smirked at Harry and disappeared. 

“There she is,” said Harry. 

Hermione was panting slightly, hurrying up the 
stairs; one hand clutched her bag, the other seemed 
to be tucking something down the front of her robes. 

“How did you do that?” said Ron. 

“What?” said Hermione, joining them. 

“One minute you were right behind us, the next 
moment, you were back at the bottom of the stairs 
again.” 

“What?” Hermione looked slightly confused. “Oh — I 
had to go back for something. Oh no — ” 

A seam had split on Hermione’s bag. Harry wasn’t 
surprised; he could see that it was crammed with at 
least a dozen large and heavy books. 

“Why are you carrying all these around with you?” 
Ron asked her. 

“You know how many subjects I’m taking,” said 
Hermione breathlessly. “Couldn’t hold these for me, 
could you?” 

“But — ” Ron was turning over the books she had 
handed him, looking at the covers. “You haven’t got 
any of these subjects today. It’s only Defense Against 
the Dark Arts this afternoon.” 



Page | 143 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh yes,” said Hermione vaguely, but she packed all 
the books back into her bag just the same. “I hope 
there’s something good for lunch, I’m starving,” she 
added, and she marched off toward the Great Hall. 

“D’you get the feeling Hermione ’s not telling us 
something?” Ron asked Harry. 



Professor Lupin wasn’t there when they arrived at his 
first Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson. They all 
sat down, took out their books, quills, and 
parchment, and were talking when he finally entered 
the room. Lupin smiled vaguely and placed his tatty 
old briefcase on the teacher’s desk. He was as shabby 
as ever but looked healthier than he had on the train, 
as though he had had a few square meals. 

“Good afternoon,” he said. “Would you please put all 
your books back in your bags. Today’s will be a 
practical lesson. You will need only your wands.” 

A few curious looks were exchanged as the class put 
away their books. They had never had a practical 
Defense Against the Dark Arts before, unless you 
counted the memorable class last year when their old 
teacher had brought a cageful of pixies to class and 
set them loose. 

“Right then,” said Professor Lupin, when everyone 
was ready. “If you’d follow me.” 

Puzzled but interested, the class got to its feet and 
followed Professor Lupin out of the classroom. He led 
them along the deserted corridor and around a 
corner, where the first thing they saw was Peeves the 
Poltergeist, who was floating upside down in midair 
and stuffing the nearest keyhole with chewing gum. 
Page | 144 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Peeves didn’t look up until Professor Lupin was two 
feet away; then he wiggled his curly-toed feet and 
broke into song. 

“Loony, loopy Lupin,” Peeves sang. “Loony, loopy 
Lupin, loony, loopy Lupin — ” 

Rude and unmanageable as he almost always was, 
Peeves usually showed some respect toward the 
teachers. Everyone looked quickly at Professor Lupin 
to see how he would take this; to their surprise, he 
was still smiling. 

“I’d take that gum out of the keyhole if I were you, 
Peeves,” he said pleasantly. “Mr. Filch won’t be able to 
get in to his brooms.” 

Filch was the Hogwarts caretaker, a bad-tempered, 
failed wizard who waged a constant war against the 
students and, indeed, Peeves. However, Peeves paid 
no attention to Professor Lupin’s words, except to 
blow a loud wet raspberry. 

Professor Lupin gave a small sigh and took out his 
wand. 

“This is a useful little spell,” he told the class over his 
shoulder. “Please watch closely.” 

He raised the wand to shoulder height, said, 

“ Waddiwasil ” and pointed it at Peeves. 

With the force of a bullet, the wad of chewing gum 
shot out of the keyhole and straight down Peeves ’s left 
nostril; he whirled upright and zoomed away, cursing. 

“Cool, sir!” said Dean Thomas in amazement. 



Page | 145 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Thank you, Dean,” said Professor Lupin, putting his 
wand away again. “Shall we proceed?” 

They set off again, the class looking at shabby 
Professor Lupin with increased respect. He led them 
down a second corridor and stopped, right outside the 
staffroom door. 

“Inside, please,” said Professor Lupin, opening it and 
standing back. 

The staffroom, a long, paneled room full of old, 
mismatched chairs, was empty except for one teacher. 
Professor Snape was sitting in a low armchair, and he 
looked around as the class filed in. His eyes were 
glittering and there was a nasty sneer playing around 
his mouth. As Professor Lupin came in and made to 
close the door behind him, Snape said, “Leave it open, 
Lupin. Td rather not witness this.” 

He got to his feet and strode past the class, his black 
robes billowing behind him. At the doorway he turned 
on his heel and said, “Possibly no one’s warned you, 
Lupin, but this class contains Neville Longbottom. I 
would advise you not to entrust him with anything 
difficult. Not unless Miss Granger is hissing 
instructions in his ear.” 

Neville went scarlet. Harry glared at Snape; it was bad 
enough that he bullied Neville in his own classes, let 
alone doing it in front of other teachers. 

Professor Lupin had raised his eyebrows. 

“I was hoping that Neville would assist me with the 
first stage of the operation,” he said, “and I am sure 
he will perform it admirably.” 



Page | 146 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Neville’s face went, if possible, even redder. Snape’s 
lip curled, but he left, shutting the door with a snap. 

“Now, then,” said Professor Lupin, beckoning the 
class toward the end of the room, where there was 
nothing but an old wardrobe where the teachers kept 
their spare robes. As Professor Lupin went to stand 
next to it, the wardrobe gave a sudden wobble, 
banging off the wall. 

“Nothing to worry about,” said Professor Lupin calmly 
because a few people had jumped backward in alarm. 
“There’s a boggart in there.” 

Most people seemed to feel that this was something to 
worry about. Neville gave Professor Lupin a look of 
pure terror, and Seamus Finnigan eyed the now 
rattling doorknob apprehensively. 

“Boggarts like dark, enclosed spaces,” said Professor 
Lupin. “Wardrobes, the gap beneath beds, the 
cupboards under sinks — I’ve even met one that had 
lodged itself in a grandfather clock. This one moved in 
yesterday afternoon, and I asked the headmaster if 
the staff would leave it to give my third years some 
practice. 

“So, the first question we must ask ourselves is, what 
is a boggart?” 

Hermione put up her hand. 

“It’s a shape-shifter,” she said. “It can take the shape 
of whatever it thinks will frighten us most.” 

“Couldn’t have put it better myself,” said Professor 
Lupin, and Hermione glowed. “So the boggart sitting 
in the darkness within has not yet assumed a form. 

He does not yet know what will frighten the person on 

Page | 147 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




the other side of the door. Nobody knows what a 
boggart looks like when he is alone, but when I let 
him out, he will immediately become whatever each of 
us most fears. 

“This means,” said Professor Lupin, choosing to 
ignore Neville’s small sputter of terror, “that we have a 
huge advantage over the boggart before we begin. 

Have you spotted it, Harry?” 

Trying to answer a question with Hermione next to 
him, bobbing up and down on the balls of her feet 
with her hand in the air, was very off-putting, but 
Harry had a go. 

“Er — because there are so many of us, it won’t know 
what shape it should be?” 

“Precisely,” said Professor Lupin, and Hermione put 
her hand down, looking a little disappointed. “It’s 
always best to have company when you’re dealing 
with a boggart. He becomes confused. Which should 
he become, a headless corpse or a flesh-eating slug? I 
once saw a boggart make that very mistake — tried to 
frighten two people at once and turned himself into 
half a slug. Not remotely frightening. 

“The charm that repels a boggart is simple, yet it 
requires force of mind. You see, the thing that really 
finishes a boggart is laughter. What you need to do is 
force it to assume a shape that you find amusing. 

“We will practice the charm without wands first. After 
me, please ... riddikulusV’ 

“ RiddikulusV’ said the class together. 

“Good,” said Professor Lupin. “Very good. But that 
was the easy part, I’m afraid. You see, the word alone 

Page | 148 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




is not enough. And this is where you come in, 
Neville.” 



The wardrobe shook again, though not as much as 
Neville, who walked forward as though he were 
heading for the gallows. 

“Right, Neville,” said Professor Lupin. “First things 
first: what would you say is the thing that frightens 
you most in the world?” 

Neville’s lips moved, but no noise came out. 

“Didn’t catch that, Neville, sorry,” said Professor 
Lupin cheerfully. 

Neville looked around rather wildly, as though 
begging someone to help him, then said, in barely 
more than a whisper, “Professor Snape.” 

Nearly everyone laughed. Even Neville grinned 
apologetically. Professor Lupin, however, looked 
thoughtful. 

“Professor Snape ... hmmm ... Neville, I believe you 
live with your grandmother?” 

“Er — yes,” said Neville nervously. “But — I don’t 
want the boggart to turn into her either.” 

“No, no, you misunderstand me,” said Professor 
Lupin, now smiling. “I wonder, could you tell us what 
sort of clothes your grandmother usually wears?” 

Neville looked startled, but said, “Well ... always the 
same hat. A tall one with a stuffed vulture on top. 

And a long dress ... green, normally ... and sometimes 
a fox-fur scarf.” 

Page | 149 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“And a handbag?” prompted Professor Lupin. 

“A big red one,” said Neville. 

“Right then,” said Professor Lupin. “Can you picture 
those clothes very clearly, Neville? Can you see them 
in your mind’s eye?” 

“Yes,” said Neville uncertainly, plainly wondering 
what was coming next. 

“When the boggart bursts out of this wardrobe, 

Neville, and sees you, it will assume the form of 
Professor Snape,” said Lupin. “And you will raise your 
wand — thus — and cry ‘Riddikulus’ — and 
concentrate hard on your grandmother’s clothes. If all 
goes well, Professor Boggart Snape will be forced into 
that vulture-topped hat, and that green dress, with 
that big red handbag.” 

There was a great shout of laughter. The wardrobe 
wobbled more violently. 

“If Neville is successful, the boggart is likely to shift 
his attention to each of us in turn,” said Professor 
Lupin. “I would like all of you to take a moment now 
to think of the thing that scares you most, and 
imagine how you might force it to look comical. ...” 

The room went quiet. Harry thought ... What scared 
him most in the world? 

His first thought was Lord Voldemort — a Voldemort 
returned to full strength. But before he had even 
started to plan a possible counterattack on a boggart - 
Voldemort, a horrible image came floating to the 
surface of his mind. ... 



Page | 150 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




A rotting, glistening hand, slithering back beneath a 
black cloak ... a long, rattling breath from an unseen 
mouth . . . then a cold so penetrating it felt like 
drowning. ... 

Harry shivered, then looked around, hoping no one 
had noticed. Many people had their eyes shut tight. 
Ron was muttering to himself, “Take its legs off.” 
Harry was sure he knew what that was about. Ron’s 
greatest fear was spiders. 

“Everyone ready?” said Professor Lupin. 

Harry felt a lurch of fear. He wasn’t ready. How could 
you make a dementor less frightening? But he didn’t 
want to ask for more time; everyone else was nodding 
and rolling up their sleeves. 

“Neville, we’re going to back away,” said Professor 
Lupin. “Let you have a clear field, all right? I’ll call the 
next person forward. ... Everyone back, now, so 
Neville can get a clear shot — ” 

They all retreated, backed against the walls, leaving 
Neville alone beside the wardrobe. He looked pale and 
frightened, but he had pushed up the sleeves of his 
robes and was holding his wand ready. 

“On the count of three, Neville,” said Professor Lupin, 
who was pointing his own wand at the handle of the 
wardrobe. “One — two — three — now\” 

A jet of sparks shot from the end of Professor Lupin’s 
wand and hit the doorknob. The wardrobe burst 
open. Hook-nosed and menacing, Professor Snape 
stepped out, his eyes flashing at Neville. 



Page | 151 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Neville backed away, his wand up, mouthing 
wordlessly. Snape was bearing down upon him, 
reaching inside his robes. 

“R — r — riddikulusV’ squeaked Neville. 

There was a noise like a whip crack. Snape stumbled; 
he was wearing a long, lace-trimmed dress and a 
towering hat topped with a moth-eaten vulture, and 
he was swinging a huge crimson handbag. 

There was a roar of laughter; the boggart paused, 
confused, and Professor Lupin shouted, “Parvati! 
Forward!” 

Parvati walked forward, her face set. Snape rounded 
on her. There was another crack, and where he had 
stood was a bloodstained, bandaged mummy; its 
sightless face was turned to Parvati and it began to 
walk toward her very slowly, dragging its feet, its stiff 
arms rising — 

“RiddikulusV’ cried Parvati. 

A bandage unraveled at the mummy’s feet; it became 
entangled, fell face forward, and its head rolled off. 

“Seamus!” roared Professor Lupin. 

Seamus darted past Parvati. 

Crack ! Where the mummy had been was a woman 
with floor-length black hair and a skeletal, green- 
tinged face — a banshee. She opened her mouth wide 
and an unearthly sound filled the room, a long, 
wailing shriek that made the hair on Harry’s head 
stand on end — 

“RiddikulusV’ shouted Seamus. 

Page | 152 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The banshee made a rasping noise and clutched her 
throat; her voice was gone. 

Crack). The banshee turned into a rat, which chased 
its tail in a circle, then — crack). — became a 
rattlesnake, which slithered and writhed before — 
crack ! — becoming a single, bloody eyeball. 

“It’s confused!” shouted Lupin. “We’re getting there! 
Dean!” 

Dean hurried forward. 

Crack) The eyeball became a severed hand, which 
flipped over and began to creep along the floor like a 
crab. 

“RiddikulusV’ yelled Dean. 

There was a snap, and the hand was trapped in a 
mousetrap. 

“Excellent! Ron, you next!” 

Ron leapt forward. 

Crack) 

Quite a few people screamed. A giant spider, six feet 
tall and covered in hair, was advancing on Ron, 
clicking its pincers menacingly. For a moment, Harry 
thought Ron had frozen. Then — 

“RiddikulusV’ bellowed Ron, and the spider’s legs 
vanished; it rolled over and over; Lavender Brown 
squealed and ran out of its way and it came to a halt 
at Harry’s feet. He raised his wand, ready, but — 



Page | 153 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Here!” shouted Professor Lupin suddenly, hurrying 
forward. 

Crack). 

The legless spider had vanished. For a second, 
everyone looked wildly around to see where it was. 
Then they saw a silvery-white orb hanging in the air 
in front of Lupin, who said, “RiddikulusV’ almost 
lazily. 

Crack ! 

“Forward, Neville, and finish him off!” said Lupin as 
the boggart landed on the floor as a cockroach. Crack). 
Snape was back. This time Neville charged forward 
looking determined. 

“RiddikulusV’ he shouted, and they had a split 
second’s view of Snape in his lacy dress before Neville 
let out a great “Ha!” of laughter, and the boggart 
exploded, burst into a thousand tiny wisps of smoke, 
and was gone. 

“Excellent!” cried Professor Lupin as the class broke 
into applause. “Excellent, Neville. Well done, 
everyone. ... Let me see ... five points to Gryffindor for 
every person to tackle the boggart — ten for Neville 
because he did it twice . . . and five each to Hermione 
and Harry.” 

“But I didn’t do anything,” said Harry. 

“You and Hermione answered my questions correctly 
at the start of the class, Harry,” Lupin said lightly. 
“Very well, everyone, an excellent lesson. Homework, 
kindly read the chapter on boggarts and summarize it 
for me ... to be handed in on Monday. That will be 
all.” 

Page | 154 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Talking excitedly, the class left the staffroom. Harry, 
however, wasn’t feeling cheerful. Professor Lupin had 
deliberately stopped him from tackling the boggart. 
Why? Was it because he’d seen Harry collapse on the 
train, and thought he wasn’t up to much? Had he 
thought Harry would pass out again? 

But no one else seemed to have noticed anything. 

“Did you see me take that banshee?” shouted 
Seamus. 

“And the hand!” said Dean, waving his own around. 
“And Snape in that hat!” 

“And my mummy!” 

“I wonder why Professor Lupin’s frightened of crystal 
balls?” said Lavender thoughtfully. 

“That was the best Defense Against the Dark Arts 
lesson we’ve ever had, wasn’t it?” said Ron excitedly 
as they made their way back to the classroom to get 
their bags. 

“He seems like a very good teacher,” said Hermione 
approvingly. “But I wish I could have had a turn with 
the boggart — ” 

“What would it have been for you?” said Ron, 
sniggering. “A piece of homework that only got nine 
out of ten?” 



Page | 155 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




d 




FLIGHT OF THE FAT LADY 

In no time at all, Defense Against the Dark Arts had 
become most people’s favorite class. Only Draco 
Malfoy and his gang of Slytherins had anything bad to 
say about Professor Lupin. 

“Look at the state of his robes,” Malfoy would say in a 
loud whisper as Professor Lupin passed. “He dresses 
like our old house-elf.” 

But no one else cared that Professor Lupin’s robes 
were patched and frayed. His next few lessons were 
just as interesting as the first. After boggarts, they 
studied Red Caps, nasty little goblinlike creatures 
that lurked wherever there had been bloodshed: in 
the dungeons of castles and the potholes of deserted 
battlefields, waiting to bludgeon those who had gotten 
lost. From Red Caps they moved on to kappas, creepy 
water-dwellers that looked like scaly monkeys, with 
webbed hands itching to strangle unwitting waders in 
their ponds. 

Harry only wished he was as happy with some of his 
other classes. Worst of all was Potions. Snape was in 

Page | 156 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



a particularly vindictive mood these days, and no one 
was in any doubt why. The story of the boggart 
assuming Snape’s shape, and the way that Neville 
had dressed it in his grandmother’s clothes, had 
traveled through the school like wildfire. Snape didn’t 
seem to find it funny. His eyes flashed menacingly at 
the very mention of Professor Lupin’s name, and he 
was bullying Neville worse than ever. 

Harry was also growing to dread the hours he spent 
in Professor Trelawney’s stifling tower room, 
deciphering lopsided shapes and symbols, trying to 
ignore the way Professor Trelawney’s enormous eyes 
filled with tears every time she looked at him. He 
couldn’t like Professor Trelawney, even though she 
was treated with respect bordering on reverence by 
many of the class. Parvati Patil and Lavender Brown 
had taken to haunting Professor Trelawney’s tower 
room at lunchtimes, and always returned with 
annoyingly superior looks on their faces, as though 
they knew things the others didn’t. They had also 
started using hushed voices whenever they spoke to 
Harry, as though he were on his deathbed. 

Nobody really liked Care of Magical Creatures, which, 
after the action-packed first class, had become 
extremely dull. Hagrid seemed to have lost his 
confidence. They were now spending lesson after 
lesson learning how to look after flobberworms, which 
had to be some of the most boring creatures in 
existence. 

“Why would anyone bother looking after them?” said 
Ron, after yet another hour of poking shredded 
lettuce down the flobberworms’ slimy throats. 

At the start of October, however, Harry had 
something else to occupy him, something so enjoyable 
it more than made up for his unsatisfactory classes. 

Page | 157 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The Quidditch season was approaching, and Oliver 
Wood, Captain of the Gryffindor team, called a 
meeting one Thursday evening to discuss tactics for 
the new season. 

There were seven people on a Quidditch team: three 
Chasers, whose job it was to score goals by putting 
the Quaffle (a red, soccer-sized ball) through one of 
the fifty-foot-high hoops at each end of the field; two 
Beaters, who were equipped with heavy bats to repel 
the Bludgers (two heavy black balls that zoomed 
around trying to attack the players); a Keeper, who 
defended the goal posts, and the Seeker, who had the 
hardest job of all, that of catching the Golden Snitch, 
a tiny, winged, walnut-sized ball, whose capture 
ended the game and earned the Seeker’s team an 
extra one hundred and fifty points. 

Oliver Wood was a burly seventeen-year-old, now in 
his seventh and final year at Hogwarts. There was a 
quiet sort of desperation in his voice as he addressed 
his six fellow team members in the chilly locker rooms 
on the edge of the darkening Quidditch field. 

“This is our last chance — my last chance — to win 
the Quidditch Cup,” he told them, striding up and 
down in front of them. “I’ll be leaving at the end of 
this year. I’ll never get another shot at it. 

“Gryffindor hasn’t won for seven years now. Okay, so 
we’ve had the worst luck in the world — injuries — 
then the tournament getting called off last year. ...” 
Wood swallowed, as though the memory still brought 
a lump to his throat. “But we also know we’ve got the 
best — ruddy — team — in — the — school,” he said, 
punching a fist into his other hand, the old manic 
glint back in his eye. 

“We’ve got three superb Chasers.” 

Page | 158 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Wood pointed at Alicia Spinnet, Angelina Johnson, 
and Katie Bell. 

“We’ve got two unbeatable Beaters.” 

“Stop it, Oliver, you’re embarrassing us,” said Fred 
and George Weasley together, pretending to blush. 

“And we’ve got a Seeker who has never failed to win 
us a match).” Wood rumbled, glaring at Harry with a 
kind of furious pride. “And me,” he added as an 
afterthought. 

“We think you’re very good too, Oliver,” said George. 

“Spanking good Keeper,” said Fred. 

“The point is,” Wood went on, resuming his pacing, 
“the Quidditch Cup should have had our name on it 
these last two years. Ever since Harry joined the 
team, I’ve thought the thing was in the bag. But we 
haven’t got it, and this year’s the last chance we’ll get 
to finally see our name on the thing. ...” 

Wood spoke so dejectedly that even Fred and George 
looked sympathetic. 

“Oliver, this year’s our year,” said Fred. 

“Well do it, Oliver!” said Angelina. 

“Definitely,” said Harry. 

Full of determination, the team started training 
sessions, three evenings a week. The weather was 
getting colder and wetter, the nights darker, but no 
amount of mud, wind, or rain could tarnish Harry’s 
wonderful vision of finally winning the huge, silver 
Quidditch Cup. 

Page | 159 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry returned to the Gryffindor common room one 
evening after training, cold and stiff but pleased with 
the way practice had gone, to find the room buzzing 
excitedly. 

“What’s happened?” he asked Ron and Hermione, 
who were sitting in two of the best chairs by the 
fireside and completing some star charts for 
Astronomy. 

“First Hogsmeade weekend,” said Ron, pointing at a 
notice that had appeared on the battered old bulletin 
board. “End of October. Halloween.” 

“Excellent,” said Fred, who had followed Harry 
through the portrait hole. “I need to visit Zonko’s. I’m 
nearly out of Stink Pellets.” 

Harry threw himself into a chair beside Ron, his high 
spirits ebbing away. Hermione seemed to read his 
mind. 

“Harry, I’m sure you’ll be able to go next time,” she 
said. “They’re bound to catch Black soon. He’s been 
sighted once already” 

“Black’s not fool enough to try anything in 
Hogsmeade,” said Ron. “Ask McGonagall if you can go 
this time, Harry. The next one might not be for ages 



“Ron\” said Hermione. “Harry’s supposed to stay in 
school — ” 

“He can’t be the only third year left behind,” said Ron. 
“Ask McGonagall, go on, Harry — ” 

“Yeah, I think I will,” said Harry, making up his mind. 



Page | 160 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione opened her mouth to argue, but at that 
moment Crookshanks leapt lightly onto her lap. A 
large, dead spider was dangling from his mouth. 

“Does he have to eat that in front of us?” said Ron, 
scowling. 

“Clever Crookshanks, did you catch that all by 
yourself?” said Hermione. 

Crookshanks slowly chewed up the spider, his yellow 
eyes fixed insolently on Ron. 

“Just keep him over there, that’s all,” said Ron 
irritably, turning back to his star chart. “I’ve got 
Scabbers asleep in my bag.” 

Harry yawned. He really wanted to go to bed, but he 
still had his own star chart to complete. He pulled his 
bag toward him, took out parchment, ink, and quill, 
and started work. 

“You can copy mine, if you like,” said Ron, labeling 
his last star with a flourish and shoving the chart 
toward Harry. 

Hermione, who disapproved of copying, pursed her 
lips but didn’t say anything. Crookshanks was still 
staring unblinkingly at Ron, flicking the end of his 
bushy tail. Then, without warning, he pounced. 

“OY!” Ron roared, seizing his bag as Crookshanks 
sank four sets of claws deep inside it and began 
tearing ferociously. “GET OFF, YOU STUPID ANIMAL!” 

Ron tried to pull the bag away from Crookshanks, but 
Crookshanks clung on, spitting and slashing. 



Page | 161 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ron, don’t hurt him!” squealed Hermione; the whole 
common room was watching; Ron whirled the bag 
around, Crookshanks still clinging to it, and Scabbers 
came flying out of the top — 

“CATCH THAT CAT!” Ron yelled as Crookshanks freed 
himself from the remnants of the bag, sprang over the 
table, and chased after the terrified Scabbers. 

George Weasley made a lunge for Crookshanks but 
missed; Scabbers streaked through twenty pairs of 
legs and shot beneath an old chest of drawers. 
Crookshanks skidded to a halt, crouched low on his 
bandy legs, and started making furious swipes 
beneath it with his front paw. 

Ron and Hermione hurried over; Hermione grabbed 
Crookshanks around the middle and heaved him 
away; Ron threw himself onto his stomach and, with 
great difficulty, pulled Scabbers out by the tail. 

“Look at him!” he said furiously to Hermione, 
dangling Scabbers in front of her. “He’s skin and 
bone! You keep that cat away from him!” 

“Crookshanks doesn’t understand it’s wrong!” said 
Hermione, her voice shaking. “All cats chase rats, 
Ron!” 

“There’s something funny about that animal!” said 
Ron, who was trying to persuade a frantically wiggling 
Scabbers back into his pocket. “It heard me say that 
Scabbers was in my bag!” 

“Oh, what rubbish,” said Hermione impatiently. 
“Crookshanks could smell him, Ron, how else d’you 
think — ” 



Page | 162 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“That cat’s got it in for Scabbers!” said Ron, ignoring 
the people around him, who were starting to giggle. 
“And Scabbers was here first, and he’s ill!” 

Ron marched through the common room and out of 
sight up the stairs to the boys’ dormitories. 

Ron was still in a bad mood with Hermione next day. 
He barely talked to her all through Herbology, even 
though he, Harry, and Hermione were working 
together on the same puffapod. 

“How’s Scabbers?” Hermione asked timidly as they 
stripped fat pink pods from the plants and emptied 
the shining beans into a wooden pail. 

“He’s hiding at the bottom of my bed, shaking,” said 
Ron angrily, missing the pail and scattering beans 
over the greenhouse floor. 

“Careful, Weasley, careful!” cried Professor Sprout as 
the beans burst into bloom before their very eyes. 

They had Transfiguration next. Harry, who had 
resolved to ask Professor McGonagall after the lesson 
whether he could go into Hogsmeade with the rest, 
joined the line outside the class trying to decide how 
he was going to argue his case. He was distracted, 
however, by a disturbance at the front of the line. 

Lavender Brown seemed to be crying. Parvati had her 
arm around her and was explaining something to 
Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas, who were 
looking very serious. 

“What’s the matter, Lavender?” said Hermione 
anxiously as she, Harry, and Ron went to join the 
group. 



Page | 163 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“She got a letter from home this morning,” Parvati 
whispered. “It’s her rabbit, Binky. He’s been killed by 
a fox.” 

“Oh,” said Hermione, “I’m sorry, Lavender.” 

“I should have known!” said Lavender tragically. “You 
know what day it is?” 

“Er — ” 



“The sixteenth of October! That thing you’re dreading, 
it will happen on the sixteenth of October!’ 
Remember? She was right, she was right!” 

The whole class was gathered around Lavender now. 
Seamus shook his head seriously. Hermione 
hesitated; then she said, “You — you were dreading 
Binky being killed by a fox?” 

“Well, not necessarily by a fox,” said Lavender, 
looking up at Hermione with streaming eyes, “but I 
was obviously dreading him dying, wasn’t I?” 

“Oh,” said Hermione. She paused again. Then — 

“Was Binky an old rabbit?” 

“N — no!” sobbed Lavender. “H — he was only a 
baby!” 

Parvati tightened her arm around Lavender’s 
shoulders. 

“But then, why would you dread him dying?” said 
Hermione. 

Parvati glared at her. 



Page | 164 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, look at it logically,” said Hermione, turning to 
the rest of the group. “I mean, Binky didn’t even die 
today, did he? Lavender just got the news today — ” 
Lavender wailed loudly. “ — and she can’t have been 
dreading it, because it’s come as a real shock — ” 

“Don’t mind Hermione, Lavender,” said Ron loudly, 
“she doesn’t think other people’s pets matter very 
much.” 

Professor McGonagall opened the classroom door at 
that moment, which was perhaps lucky; Hermione 
and Ron were looking daggers at each other, and 
when they got into class, they seated themselves on 
either side of Harry and didn’t talk to each other for 
the whole class. 

Harry still hadn’t decided what he was going to say to 
Professor McGonagall when the bell rang at the end of 
the lesson, but it was she who brought up the subject 
of Hogsmeade first. 

“One moment, please!” she called as the class made 
to leave. “As you’re all in my House, you should hand 
Hogsmeade permission forms to me before Halloween. 
No form, no visiting the village, so don’t forget!” 

Neville put up his hand. 

“Please, Professor, I — I think I’ve lost — ” 

“Your grandmother sent yours to me directly, 
Longbottom,” said Professor McGonagall. “She 
seemed to think it was safer. Well, that’s all, you may 
leave.” 

“Ask her now,” Ron hissed at Harry. 

“Oh, but — ” Hermione began. 

Page | 165 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Go for it, Harry,” said Ron stubbornly. 

Harry waited for the rest of the class to disappear, 
then headed nervously for Professor McGonagall’s 
desk. 

“Yes, Potter?” 

Harry took a deep breath. 

“Professor, my aunt and uncle — er — forgot to sign 
my form,” he said. 

Professor McGonagall looked over her square 
spectacles at him but didn’t say anything. 

“So — er — d’you think it would be all right — I 
mean, will it be okay if I — if I go to Hogsmeade?” 

Professor McGonagall looked down and began 
shuffling papers on her desk. 

“I’m afraid not, Potter,” she said. “You heard what I 
said. No form, no visiting the village. That’s the rule.” 

“But — Professor, my aunt and uncle — you know, 
they’re Muggles, they don’t really understand about 
— about Hogwarts forms and stuff,” Harry said, while 
Ron egged him on with vigorous nods. “If you said I 
could go — ” 

“But I don’t say so,” said Professor McGonagall, 
standing up and piling her papers neatly into a 
drawer. “The form clearly states that the parent or 
guardian must give permission.” She turned to look at 
him, with an odd expression on her face. Was it pity? 
“I’m sorry, Potter, but that’s my final word. You had 
better hurry, or you’ll be late for your next lesson.” 



Page | 166 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




There was nothing to be done. Ron called Professor 
McGonagall a lot of names that greatly annoyed 
Hermione; Hermione assumed an “all-for-the-best” 
expression that made Ron even angrier, and Harry 
had to endure everyone in the class talking loudly 
and happily about what they were going to do first, 
once they got into Hogsmeade. 

“There’s always the feast,” said Ron, in an effort to 
cheer Harry up. “You know, the Halloween feast, in 
the evening.” 

“Yeah,” said Harry gloomily, “great.” 

The Halloween feast was always good, but it would 
taste a lot better if he was coming to it after a day in 
Hogsmeade with everyone else. Nothing anyone said 
made him feel any better about being left behind. 
Dean Thomas, who was good with a quill, had offered 
to forge Uncle Vernon’s signature on the form, but as 
Harry had already told Professor McGonagall he 
hadn’t had it signed, that was no good. Ron 
halfheartedly suggested the Invisibility Cloak, but 
Hermione stamped on that one, reminding Ron what 
Dumbledore had told them about the dementors 
being able to see through them. Percy had what were 
possibly the least helpful words of comfort. 

“They make a fuss about Hogsmeade, but I assure 
you, Harry, it’s not all it’s cracked up to be,” he said 
seriously. “All right, the sweetshop’s rather good, and 
Zonko’s Joke Shop’s frankly dangerous, and yes, the 
Shrieking Shack’s always worth a visit, but really, 
Harry, apart from that, you’re not missing anything.” 

On Halloween morning, Harry awoke with the rest 
and went down to breakfast, feeling thoroughly 
depressed, though doing his best to act normally. 



Page | 167 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well bring you lots of sweets back from 
Honeydukes,” said Hermione, looking desperately 
sorry for him. 

“Yeah, loads,” said Ron. He and Hermione had finally 
forgotten their squabble about Crookshanks in the 
face of Harry’s difficulties. 

“Don’t worry about me,” said Harry, in what he hoped 
was an offhand voice, “I’ll see you at the feast. Have a 
good time.” 

He accompanied them to the entrance hall, where 
Filch, the caretaker, was standing inside the front 
doors, checking off names against a long list, peering 
suspiciously into every face, and making sure that no 
one was sneaking out who shouldn’t be going. 

“Staying here, Potter?” shouted Malfoy, who was 
standing in line with Crabbe and Goyle. “Scared of 
passing the dementors?” 

Harry ignored him and made his solitary way up the 
marble staircase, through the deserted corridors, and 
back to Gryffindor Tower. 

“Password?” said the Fat Lady, jerking out of a doze. 

“Fortuna Major,” said Harry listlessly. 

The portrait swung open and he climbed through the 
hole into the common room. It was full of chattering 
first and second years, and a few older students, who 
had obviously visited Hogsmeade so often the novelty 
had worn off. 

“Harry! Harry! Hi, Harry!” 



Page | 168 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




It was Colin Creevey, a second year who was deeply in 
awe of Harry and never missed an opportunity to 
speak to him. 

“Aren’t you going to Hogsmeade, Harry? Why not? 
Hey” — Colin looked eagerly around at his friends — 
“you can come and sit with us, if you like, Harry!” 

“Er — no, thanks, Colin,” said Harry, who wasn’t in 
the mood to have a lot of people staring avidly at the 
scar on his forehead. “I — I’ve got to go to the library, 
got to get some work done.” 

After that, he had no choice but to turn right around 
and head back out of the portrait hole again. 

“What was the point waking me up?” the Fat Lady 
called grumpily after him as he walked away. 

Harry wandered dispiritedly toward the library, but 
halfway there he changed his mind; he didn’t feel like 
working. He turned around and came face-to-face 
with Filch, who had obviously just seen off the last of 
the Hogsmeade visitors. 

“What are you doing?” Filch snarled suspiciously. 

“Nothing,” said Harry truthfully. 

“Nothing!” spat Filch, his jowls quivering 
unpleasantly. “A likely story! Sneaking around on 
your own — why aren’t you in Hogsmeade buying 
Stink Pellets and Belch Powder and Whizzing Worms 
like the rest of your nasty little friends?” 

Harry shrugged. 



Page | 169 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, get back to your common room where you 
belong!” snapped Filch, and he stood glaring until 
Harry had passed out of sight. 

But Harry didn’t go back to the common room; he 
climbed a staircase, thinking vaguely of visiting the 
Owlery to see Hedwig, and was walking along another 
corridor when a voice from inside one of the rooms 
said, “Harry?” 

Harry doubled back to see who had spoken and met 
Professor Lupin, looking around his office door. 

“What are you doing?” said Lupin, though in a very 
different voice from Filch. “Where are Ron and 
Hermione?” 

“Hogsmeade,” said Harry, in a would-be casual voice. 

“Ah,” said Lupin. He considered Harry for a moment. 
“Why don’t you come in? I’ve just taken delivery of a 
grindylow for our next lesson.” 

“A what?” said Harry. 

He followed Lupin into his office. In the corner stood a 
very large tank of water. A sickly green creature with 
sharp little horns had its face pressed against the 
glass, pulling faces and flexing its long, spindly 
fingers. 

“Water demon,” said Lupin, surveying the grindylow 
thoughtfully. “We shouldn’t have much difficulty with 
him, not after the kappas. The trick is to break his 
grip. You notice the abnormally long fingers? Strong, 
but very brittle.” 

The grindylow bared its green teeth and then buried 
itself in a tangle of weeds in a corner. 

Page | 170 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Cup of tea?” Lupin said, looking around for his 
kettle. “I was just thinking of making one.” 

“All right,” said Harry awkwardly. 

Lupin tapped the kettle with his wand and a blast of 
steam issued suddenly from the spout. 

“Sit down,” said Lupin, taking the lid off a dusty tin. 
“I’ve only got teabags, I’m afraid — but I daresay 
you’ve had enough of tea leaves?” 

Harry looked at him. Lupin’s eyes were twinkling. 

“How did you know about that?” Harry asked. 

“Professor McGonagall told me,” said Lupin, passing 
Harry a chipped mug of tea. “You’re not worried, are 
you?” 

“No,” said Harry. 

He thought for a moment of telling Lupin about the 
dog he’d seen in Magnolia Crescent but decided not 
to. He didn’t want Lupin to think he was a coward, 
especially since Lupin already seemed to think he 
couldn’t cope with a boggart. 

Something of Harry’s thoughts seemed to have shown 
on his face, because Lupin said, “Anything worrying 
you, Harry?” 

“No,” Harry lied. He drank a bit of tea and watched 
the grindylow brandishing a fist at him. “Yes,” he said 
suddenly, putting his tea down on Lupin’s desk. “You 
know that day we fought the boggart? 

“Yes,” said Lupin slowly. 



Page | 171 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Why didn’t you let me fight it?” said Harry abruptly. 
Lupin raised his eyebrows. 

“I would have thought that was obvious, Harry,” he 
said, sounding surprised. 

Harry, who had expected Lupin to deny that he’d 
done any such thing, was taken aback. 

“Why?” he said again. 

“Well,” said Lupin, frowning slightly, “I assumed that 
if the boggart faced you, it would assume the shape of 
Lord Voldemort.” 

Harry stared. Not only was this the last answer he’d 
expected, but Lupin had said Voldemort ’s name. The 
only person Harry had ever heard say the name aloud 
(apart from himself) was Professor Dumbledore. 

“Clearly, I was wrong,” said Lupin, still frowning at 
Harry. “But I didn’t think it a good idea for Lord 
Voldemort to materialize in the staffroom. I imagined 
that people would panic.” 

“I didn’t think of Voldemort,” said Harry honestly. “I 
— I remembered those dementors.” 

“I see,” said Lupin thoughtfully. “Well, well ... I’m 
impressed.” He smiled slightly at the look of surprise 
on Harry’s face. “That suggests that what you fear 
most of all is — fear. Very wise, Harry.” 

Harry didn’t know what to say to that, so he drank 
some more tea. 

“So you’ve been thinking that I didn’t believe you 
capable of fighting the boggart?” said Lupin shrewdly. 

Page | 172 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well ... yeah,” said Harry. He was suddenly feeling a 
lot happier. “Professor Lupin, you know the 
dementors — ” 

He was interrupted by a knock on the door. 

“Come in,” called Lupin. 

The door opened, and in came Snape. He was 
carrying a goblet, which was smoking faintly, and 
stopped at the sight of Harry, his black eyes 
narrowing. 

“Ah, Severus,” said Lupin, smiling. “Thanks very 
much. Could you leave it here on the desk for me?” 

Snape set down the smoking goblet, his eyes 
wandering between Harry and Lupin. 

“I was just showing Harry my grindylow,” said Lupin 
pleasantly, pointing at the tank. 

“Fascinating,” said Snape, without looking at it. “You 
should drink that directly, Lupin.” 

“Yes, yes, I will,” said Lupin. 

“I made an entire cauldronful,” Snape continued. “If 
you need more.” 

“I should probably take some again tomorrow. Thanks 
very much, Severus.” 

“Not at all,” said Snape, but there was a look in his 
eye Harry didn’t like. He backed out of the room, 
unsmiling and watchful. 

Harry looked curiously at the goblet. Lupin smiled. 



Page | 173 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Professor Snape has very kindly concocted a potion 
for me,” he said. “I have never been much of a potion- 
brewer and this one is particularly complex.” He 
picked up the goblet and sniffed it. “Pity sugar makes 
it useless,” he added, taking a sip and shuddering. 

“Why — ?” Harry began. Lupin looked at him and 
answered the unfinished question. 

“I’ve been feeling a bit off-color,” he said. “This potion 
is the only thing that helps. I am very lucky to be 
working alongside Professor Snape; there aren’t many 
wizards who are up to making it.” 

Professor Lupin took another sip and Harry had a 
crazy urge to knock the goblet out of his hands. 

“Professor Snape’s very interested in the Dark Arts,” 
he blurted out. 

“Really?” said Lupin, looking only mildly interested as 
he took another gulp of potion. 

“Some people reckon — ” Harry hesitated, then 
plunged recklessly on, “some people reckon he’d do 
anything to get the Defense Against the Dark Arts 
job.” 

Lupin drained the goblet and pulled a face. 

“Disgusting,” he said. “Well, Harry, I’d better get back 
to work. I’ll see you at the feast later.” 

“Right,” said Harry, putting down his empty teacup. 

The empty goblet was still smoking. 

“There you go,” said Ron. “We got as much as we 
could carry.” 

Page | 174 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




A shower of brilliantly colored sweets fell into Harry’s 
lap. It was dusk, and Ron and Hermione had just 
turned up in the common room, pink-faced from the 
cold wind and looking as though they’d had the time 
of their lives. 

“Thanks,” said Harry, picking up a packet of tiny 
black Pepper Imps. “What’s Hogsmeade like? Where 
did you go?” 

By the sound of it — everywhere. Dervish and 
Banges, the wizarding equipment shop, Zonko’s Joke 
Shop, into the Three Broomsticks for foaming mugs of 
hot butterbeer, and many places besides. 

“The post office, Harry! About two hundred owls, all 
sitting on shelves, all color-coded depending on how 
fast you want your letter to get there!” 

“Honeydukes has got a new kind of fudge; they were 
giving out free samples, there’s a bit, look — ” 

“We think we saw an ogre, honestly, they get all sorts 
at the Three Broomsticks — ” 

“Wish we could have brought you some butterbeer, 
really warms you up — ” 

“What did you do?” said Hermione, looking anxious. 
“Did you get any work done?” 

“No,” said Harry. “Lupin made me a cup of tea in his 
office. And then Snape came in. ...” 

He told them all about the goblet. Ron’s mouth fell 
open. 

“ Lupin drank it?” he gasped. “Is he mad?” 



Page | 175 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione checked her watch. 



“We’d better go down, you know, the feast’ll be 
starting in five minutes. ...” They hurried through the 
portrait hole and into the crowd, still discussing 
Snape. 

“But if he — you know” — Hermione dropped her 
voice, glancing nervously around — “if he was trying 
to — to poison Lupin — he wouldn’t have done it in 
front of Harry.” 

“Yeah, maybe,” said Harry as they reached the 
entrance hall and crossed into the Great Hall. It had 
been decorated with hundreds and hundreds of 
candle-filled pumpkins, a cloud of fluttering live bats, 
and many flaming orange streamers, which were 
swimming lazily across the stormy ceiling like brilliant 
watersnakes. 

The food was delicious; even Hermione and Ron, who 
were full to bursting with Honeydukes sweets, 
managed second helpings of everything. Harry kept 
glancing at the staff table. Professor Lupin looked 
cheerful and as well as he ever did; he was talking 
animatedly to tiny little Professor Flitwick, the 
Charms teacher. Harry moved his eyes along the 
table, to the place where Snape sat. Was he imagining 
it, or were Snape ’s eyes flickering toward Lupin more 
often than was natural? 

The feast finished with an entertainment provided by 
the Hogwarts ghosts. They popped out of the walls 
and tables to do a bit of formation gliding; Nearly 
Headless Nick, the Gryffindor ghost, had a great 
success with a reenactment of his own botched 
beheading. 



Page | 176 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




It had been such a pleasant evening that Harry’s good 
mood couldn’t even be spoiled by Malfoy, who 
shouted through the crowd as they all left the hall, 
“The dementors send their love, Potter!” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione followed the rest of the 
Gryffindors along the usual path to Gryffindor Tower, 
but when they reached the corridor that ended with 
the portrait of the Fat Lady, they found it jammed 
with students. 

“Why isn’t anyone going in?” said Ron curiously. 

Harry peered over the heads in front of him. The 
portrait seemed to be closed. 

“Let me through, please,” came Percy’s voice, and he 
came bustling importantly through the crowd. 

“What’s the holdup here? You can’t all have forgotten 
the password — excuse me, I’m Head Boy — ” 

And then a silence fell over the crowd, from the front 
first, so that a chill seemed to spread down the 
corridor. They heard Percy say, in a suddenly sharp 
voice, “Somebody get Professor Dumbledore. Quick.” 

People’s heads turned; those at the back were 
standing on tiptoe. 

“What’s going on?” said Ginny, who had just arrived. 

A moment later, Professor Dumbledore was there, 
sweeping toward the portrait; the Gryffindors 
squeezed together to let him through, and Harry, Ron, 
and Hermione moved closer to see what the trouble 
was. 

“Oh, my — ” Hermione grabbed Harry’s arm. 



Page | 177 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The Fat Lady had vanished from her portrait, which 
had been slashed so viciously that strips of canvas 
littered the floor; great chunks of it had been torn 
away completely. 

Dumbledore took one quick look at the ruined 
painting and turned, his eyes somber, to see 
Professors McGonagall, Lupin, and Snape hurrying 
toward him. 

“We need to find her,” said Dumbledore. “Professor 
McGonagall, please go to Mr. Filch at once and tell 
him to search every painting in the castle for the Fat 
Lady.” 

“You’ll be lucky!” said a cackling voice. 

It was Peeves the Poltergeist, bobbing over the crowd 
and looking delighted, as he always did, at the sight 
of wreckage or worry. 

“What do you mean, Peeves?” said Dumbledore 
calmly, and Peeves’s grin faded a little. He didn’t dare 
taunt Dumbledore. Instead he adopted an oily voice 
that was no better than his cackle. 

“Ashamed, Your Headship, sir. Doesn’t want to be 
seen. She’s a horrible mess. Saw her running through 
the landscape up on the fourth floor, sir, dodging 
between the trees. Crying something dreadful,” he 
said happily. “Poor thing,” he added unconvincingly. 

“Did she say who did it?” said Dumbledore quietly. 

“Oh yes, Professorhead,” said Peeves, with the air of 
one cradling a large bombshell in his arms. “He got 
very angry when she wouldn’t let him in, you see.” 
Peeves flipped over and grinned at Dumbledore from 



Page | 178 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




between his own legs. “Nasty temper he’s got, that 
Sirius Black.” 



Page | 179 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




9 




GRIM DEFEAT 

Professor Dumbledore sent all the Gryffindors back to 
the Great Hall, where they were joined ten minutes 
later by the students from Hufflepuff, Ravenclaw, and 
Slytherin, who all looked extremely confused. 

“The teachers and I need to conduct a thorough 
search of the castle,” Professor Dumbledore told them 
as Professors McGonagall and Flitwick closed all 
doors into the hall. “I’m afraid that, for your own 
safety, you will have to spend the night here. I want 
the prefects to stand guard over the entrances to the 
hall and I am leaving the Head Boy and Girl in 
charge. Any disturbance should be reported to me 
immediately,” he added to Percy, who was looking 
immensely proud and important. “Send word with one 
of the ghosts.” 

Professor Dumbledore paused, about to leave the hall, 
and said, “Oh, yes, you’ll be needing ...” 

One casual wave of his wand and the long tables flew 
to the edges of the hall and stood themselves against 

Page | 180 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



the walls; another wave, and the floor was covered 
with hundreds of squashy purple sleeping bags. 

“Sleep well,” said Professor Dumbledore, closing the 
door behind him. 

The hall immediately began to buzz excitedly; the 
Gryffindors were telling the rest of the school what 
had just happened. 

“Everyone into their sleeping bags!” shouted Percy. 
“Come on, now, no more talking! Lights out in ten 
minutes!” 

“C’mon,” Ron said to Harry and Hermione; they seized 
three sleeping bags and dragged them into a corner. 

“Do you think Black’s still in the castle?” Hermione 
whispered anxiously. 

“Dumbledore obviously thinks he might be,” said Ron. 

“It’s very lucky he picked tonight, you know,” said 
Hermione as they climbed fully dressed into their 
sleeping bags and propped themselves on their elbows 
to talk. “The one night we weren’t in the tower. ...” 

“I reckon he’s lost track of time, being on the run,” 
said Ron. “Didn’t realize it was Halloween. Otherwise 
he’d have come bursting in here.” 

Hermione shuddered. 

All around them, people were asking one another the 
same question: “How did he get in?” 

“Maybe he knows how to Apparate,” said a Ravenclaw 
a few feet away. “Just appear out of thin air, you 
know.” 

Page | 181 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Disguised himself, probably,” said a Hufflepuff fifth 
year. 

“He could’ve flown in,” suggested Dean Thomas. 

“Honestly, am I the only person who’s ever bothered 
to read Hogwarts, A History?” said Hermione crossly 
to Harry and Ron. 

“Probably,” said Ron. “Why?” 

“Because the castle’s protected by more than walls, 
you know,” said Hermione. “There are all sorts of 
enchantments on it, to stop people entering by 
stealth. You can’t just Apparate in here. And I’d like 
to see the disguise that could fool those dementors. 
They’re guarding every single entrance to the 
grounds. They’d have seen him fly in too. And Filch 
knows all the secret passages, they’ll have them 
covered. ...” 

“The lights are going out now!” Percy shouted. “I want 
everyone in their sleeping bags and no more talking!” 

The candles all went out at once. The only light now 
came from the silvery ghosts, who were drifting about 
talking seriously to the prefects, and the enchanted 
ceiling, which, like the sky outside, was scattered 
with stars. What with that, and the whispering that 
still filled the hall, Harry felt as though he were 
sleeping outdoors in a light wind. 

Once every hour, a teacher would reappear in the hall 
to check that everything was quiet. Around three in 
the morning, when many students had finally fallen 
asleep, Professor Dumbledore came in. Harry watched 
him looking around for Percy, who had been prowling 
between the sleeping bags, telling people off for 
talking. Percy was only a short way away from Harry, 
Page | 182 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Ron, and Hermione, who quickly pretended to be 
asleep as Dumbledore’s footsteps drew nearer. 

“Any sign of him, Professor?” asked Percy in a 
whisper. 

“No. All well here?” 

“Everything under control, sir.” 

“Good. There’s no point moving them all now. I’ve 
found a temporary guardian for the Gryffindor 
portrait hole. You’ll be able to move them back in 
tomorrow.” 

“And the Fat Lady, sir?” 

“Hiding in a map of Argyllshire on the second floor. 
Apparently she refused to let Black in without the 
password, so he attacked. She’s still very distressed, 
but once she’s calmed down, I’ll have Mr. Filch 
restore her.” 

Harry heard the door of the hall creak open again, 
and more footsteps. 

“Headmaster?” It was Snape. Harry kept quite still, 
listening hard. “The whole of the third floor has been 
searched. He’s not there. And Filch has done the 
dungeons; nothing there either.” 

“What about the Astronomy tower? Professor 
Trelawney’s room? The Owlery?” 

“All searched ...” 

“Very well, Severus. I didn’t really expect Black to 
linger.” 



Page | 183 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Have you any theory as to how he got in, Professor?” 
asked Snape. 

Harry raised his head very slightly off his arms to free 
his other ear. 

“Many, Severus, each of them as unlikely as the 
next.” 

Harry opened his eyes a fraction and squinted up to 
where they stood; Dumbledore ’s back was to him, but 
he could see Percy’s face, rapt with attention, and 
Snape ’s profile, which looked angry. 

“You remember the conversation we had, 

Headmaster, just before — ah — the start of term?” 
said Snape, who was barely opening his lips, as 
though trying to block Percy out of the conversation. 

“I do, Severus,” said Dumbledore, and there was 
something like warning in his voice. 

“It seems — almost impossible — that Black could 
have entered the school without inside help. I did 
express my concerns when you appointed — ” 

“I do not believe a single person inside this castle 
would have helped Black enter it,” said Dumbledore, 
and his tone made it so clear that the subject was 
closed that Snape didn’t reply. “I must go down to the 
dementors,” said Dumbledore. “I said I would inform 
them when our search was complete.” 

“Didn’t they want to help, sir?” said Percy. 

“Oh yes,” said Dumbledore coldly. “But I’m afraid no 
dementor will cross the threshold of this castle while I 
am headmaster.” 



Page | 184 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Percy looked slightly abashed. Dumbledore left the 
hall, walking quickly and quietly. Snape stood for a 
moment, watching the headmaster with an expression 
of deep resentment on his face; then he too left. 

Harry glanced sideways at Ron and Hermione. Both of 
them had their eyes open too, reflecting the starry 
ceiling. 

“What was all that about?” Ron mouthed. 

The school talked of nothing but Sirius Black for the 
next few days. The theories about how he had entered 
the castle became wilder and wilder; Hannah Abbott, 
from Hufflepuff, spent much of their next Herbology 
class telling anyone who’d listen that Black could 
turn into a flowering shrub. 

The Fat Lady’s ripped canvas had been taken off the 
wall and replaced with the portrait of Sir Cadogan 
and his fat gray pony. Nobody was very happy about 
this. Sir Cadogan spent half his time challenging 
people to duels, and the rest thinking up ridiculously 
complicated passwords, which he changed at least 
twice a day. 

“He’s a complete lunatic,” said Seamus Finnigan 
angrily to Percy. “Can’t we get anyone else?” 

“None of the other pictures wanted the job,” said 
Percy. “Frightened of what happened to the Fat Lady. 
Sir Cadogan was the only one brave enough to 
volunteer.” 

Sir Cadogan, however, was the least of Harry’s 
worries. He was now being closely watched. Teachers 
found excuses to walk along corridors with him, and 
Percy Weasley (acting, Harry suspected, on his 
mother’s orders) was tailing him everywhere like an 
Page | 185 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




extremely pompous guard dog. To cap it all, Professor 
McGonagall summoned Harry into her office, with 
such a somber expression on her face Harry thought 
someone must have died. 

“There’s no point hiding it from you any longer, 
Potter,” she said in a very serious voice. “I know this 
will come as a shock to you, but Sirius Black — ” 

“I know he’s after me,” said Harry wearily. “I heard 
Ron’s dad telling his mum. Mr. Weasley works for the 
Ministry of Magic.” 

Professor McGonagall seemed very taken aback. She 
stared at Harry for a moment or two, then said, “I see! 
Well, in that case, Potter, you’ll understand why I 
don’t think it’s a good idea for you to be practicing 
Quidditch in the evenings. Out on the field with only 
your team members, it’s very exposed, Potter — ” 

“We’ve got our first match on Saturday!” said Harry, 
outraged. “I’ve got to train, Professor!” 

Professor McGonagall considered him intently. Harry 
knew she was deeply interested in the Gryffindor 
team’s prospects; it had been she, after all, who’d 
suggested him as Seeker in the first place. He waited, 
holding his breath. 

“Hmm ...” Professor McGonagall stood up and stared 
out of the window at the Quidditch field, just visible 
through the rain. “Well ... goodness knows, I’d like to 
see us win the Cup at last ... but all the same, Potter 
... I’d be happier if a teacher were present. I’ll ask 
Madam Hooch to oversee your training sessions.” 

The weather worsened steadily as the first Quidditch 
match drew nearer. Undaunted, the Gryffindor team 
was training harder than ever under the eye of 

Page | 186 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Madam Hooch. Then, at their final training session 
before Saturday’s match, Oliver Wood gave his team 
some unwelcome news. 

“We’re not playing Slytherin!” he told them, looking 
very angry. “Flint’s just been to see me. We’re playing 
Hufflepuff instead.” 

“Why?” chorused the rest of the team. 

“Flint’s excuse is that their Seeker’s arm’s still 
injured,” said Wood, grinding his teeth furiously. “But 
it’s obvious why they’re doing it. Don’t want to play in 
this weather. Think it’ll damage their chances. ...” 

There had been strong winds and heavy rain all day, 
and as Wood spoke, they heard a distant rumble of 
thunder. 

“There’s nothing wrong with Malfoy’s arm!” said Harry 
furiously. “He’s faking it!” 

“I know that, but we can’t prove it,” said Wood 
bitterly. “And we’ve been practicing all those moves 
assuming we’re playing Slytherin, and instead it’s 
Hufflepuff, and their style’s quite different. They’ve got 
a new Captain and Seeker, Cedric Diggory — ” 

Angelina, Alicia, and Katie suddenly giggled. 

“What?” said Wood, frowning at this lighthearted 
behavior. 

“He’s that tall, good-looking one, isn’t he?” said 
Angelina. 

“Strong and silent,” said Katie, and they started to 
giggle again. 



Page | 187 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“He’s only silent because he’s too thick to string two 
words together,” said Fred impatiently. “I don’t know 
why you’re worried, Oliver, Hufflepuff is a pushover. 
Last time we played them, Harry caught the Snitch in 
about five minutes, remember?” 

“We were playing in completely different conditions!” 
Wood shouted, his eyes bulging slightly. “Diggory’s 
put a very strong side together! He’s an excellent 
Seeker! I was afraid you’d take it like this! We mustn’t 
relax! We must keep our focus! Slytherin is trying to 
wrong-foot us! We must win!” 

“Oliver, calm down!” said Fred, looking slightly 
alarmed. “We’re taking Hufflepuff very seriously. 
Seriously.” 

The day before the match, the winds reached howling 
point and the rain fell harder than ever. It was so 
dark inside the corridors and classrooms that extra 
torches and lanterns were lit. The Slytherin team was 
looking very smug indeed, and none more so than 
Malfoy. 

“Ah, if only my arm was feeling a bit better!” he sighed 
as the gale outside pounded the windows. 

Harry had no room in his head to worry about 
anything except the match tomorrow. Oliver Wood 
kept hurrying up to him between classes and giving 
him tips. The third time this happened, Wood talked 
for so long that Harry suddenly realized he was ten 
minutes late for Defense Against the Dark Arts, and 
set off at a run with Wood shouting after him, 
“Diggory’s got a very fast swerve, Harry, so you might 
want to try looping him — ” 



Page | 188 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry skidded to a halt outside the Defense Against 
the Dark Arts classroom, pulled the door open, and 
dashed inside. 

“Sorry I’m late, Professor Lupin, I — ” 

But it wasn’t Professor Lupin who looked up at him 
from the teacher’s desk; it was Snape. 

“This lesson began ten minutes ago, Potter, so I think 
we’ll make it ten points from Gryffindor. Sit down.” 

But Harry didn’t move. 

“Where’s Professor Lupin?” he said. 

“He says he is feeling too ill to teach today,” said 
Snape with a twisted smile. “I believe I told you to sit 
down?” 

But Harry stayed where he was. 

“What’s wrong with him?” 

Snape ’s black eyes glittered. 

“Nothing life-threatening,” he said, looking as though 
he wished it were. “Five more points from Gryffindor, 
and if I have to ask you to sit down again, it will be 
fifty.” 

Harry walked slowly to his seat and sat down. Snape 
looked around at the class. 

“As I was saying before Potter interrupted, Professor 
Lupin has not left any record of the topics you have 
covered so far — ” 



Page | 189 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Please, sir, we’ve done boggarts, Red Caps, kappas, 
and grindylows,” said Hermione quickly, “and we’re 
just about to start — ” 

“Be quiet,” said Snape coldly. “I did not ask for 
information. I was merely commenting on Professor 
Lupin’s lack of organization.” 

“He’s the best Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher 
we’ve ever had,” said Dean Thomas boldly, and there 
was a murmur of agreement from the rest of the 
class. Snape looked more menacing than ever. 

“You are easily satisfied. Lupin is hardly overtaxing 
you — I would expect first years to be able to deal 
with Red Caps and grindylows. Today we shall 
discuss — ” 

Harry watched him flick through the textbook, to the 
very back chapter, which he must know they hadn’t 
covered. 

“ — werewolves,” said Snape. 

“But, sir,” said Hermione, seemingly unable to 
restrain herself, “we’re not supposed to do werewolves 
yet, we’re due to start hinkypunks — ” 

“Miss Granger,” said Snape in a voice of deadly calm, 
“I was under the impression that I am teaching this 
lesson, not you. And I am telling you all to turn to 
page 394.” He glanced around again. “All of you! 

Now\” 

With many bitter sidelong looks and some sullen 
muttering, the class opened their books. 

“Which of you can tell me how we distinguish between 
the werewolf and the true wolf?” said Snape. 

Page | 190 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Everyone sat in motionless silence; everyone except 
Hermione, whose hand, as it so often did, had shot 
straight into the air. 

“Anyone?” Snape said, ignoring Hermione. His twisted 
smile was back. “Are you telling me that Professor 
Lupin hasn’t even taught you the basic distinction 
between — ” 

“We told you,” said Parvati suddenly, “we haven’t got 
as far as werewolves yet, we’re still on — ” 

“Silencel” snarled Snape. “Well, well, well, I never 
thought I’d meet a third -year class who wouldn’t even 
recognize a werewolf when they saw one. I shall make 
a point of informing Professor Dumbledore how very 
behind you all are. ...” 

“Please, sir,” said Hermione, whose hand was still in 
the air, “the werewolf differs from the true wolf in 
several small ways. The snout of the werewolf — ” 

“That is the second time you have spoken out of turn, 
Miss Granger,” said Snape coolly. “Five more points 
from Gryffindor for being an insufferable know-it-all.” 

Hermione went very red, put down her hand, and 
stared at the floor with her eyes full of tears. It was a 
mark of how much the class loathed Snape that they 
were all glaring at him, because every one of them 
had called Hermione a know-it-all at least once, and 
Ron, who told Hermione she was a know-it-all at least 
twice a week, said loudly, “You asked us a question 
and she knows the answer! Why ask if you don’t want 
to be told?” 

The class knew instantly he’d gone too far. Snape 
advanced on Ron slowly, and the room held its 
breath. 

Page | 191 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Detention, Weasley,” Snape said silkily, his face very 
close to Ron’s. “And if I ever hear you criticize the way 
I teach a class again, you will be very sorry indeed.” 

No one made a sound throughout the rest of the 
lesson. They sat and made notes on werewolves from 
the textbook, while Snape prowled up and down the 
rows of desks, examining the work they had been 
doing with Professor Lupin. 

“Very poorly explained . . . That is incorrect, the kappa 
is more commonly found in Mongolia. . . . Professor 
Lupin gave this eight out of ten? I wouldn’t have given 
it three. ...” 

When the bell rang at last, Snape held them back. 

“You will each write an essay, to be handed in to me, 
on the ways you recognize and kill werewolves. I want 
two rolls of parchment on the subject, and I want 
them by Monday morning. It is time somebody took 
this class in hand. Weasley, stay behind, we need to 
arrange your detention.” 

Harry and Hermione left the room with the rest of the 
class, who waited until they were well out of earshot, 
then burst into a furious tirade about Snape. 

“Snape ’s never been like this with any of our other 
Defense Against the Dark Arts teachers, even if he did 
want the job,” Harry said to Hermione. “Why’s he got 
it in for Lupin? D’you think this is all because of the 
boggart?” 

“I don’t know,” said Hermione pensively. “But I really 
hope Professor Lupin gets better soon. ...” 

Ron caught up with them five minutes later, in a 
towering rage. 

Page | 192 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“D’you know what that — ” (he called Snape 
something that made Hermione say “Ron\”) “ — is 
making me do? I’ve got to scrub out the bedpans in 
the hospital wing. Without magid” He was breathing 
deeply, his fists clenched. “Why couldn’t Black have 
hidden in Snape’s office, eh? He could have finished 
him off for us!” 

Harry woke extremely early the next morning; so early 
that it was still dark. For a moment he thought the 
roaring of the wind had woken him. Then he felt a 
cold breeze on the back of his neck and sat bolt 
upright — Peeves the Poltergeist had been floating 
next to him, blowing hard in his ear. 

“What did you do that for?” said Harry furiously. 

Peeves puffed out his cheeks, blew hard, and zoomed 
backward out of the room, cackling. 

Harry fumbled for his alarm clock and looked at it. It 
was half past four. Cursing Peeves, he rolled over and 
tried to get back to sleep, but it was very difficult, now 
that he was awake, to ignore the sounds of the 
thunder rumbling overhead, the pounding of the wind 
against the castle walls, and the distant creaking of 
the trees in the Forbidden Forest. In a few hours he 
would be out on the Quidditch field, battling through 
that gale. Finally, he gave up any thought of more 
sleep, got up, dressed, picked up his Nimbus Two 
Thousand, and walked quietly out of the dormitory. 

As Harry opened the door, something brushed against 
his leg. He bent down just in time to grab 
Crookshanks by the end of his bushy tail and drag 
him outside. 

“You know, I reckon Ron was right about you,” Harry 
told Crookshanks suspiciously. “There are plenty of 

Page | 193 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




mice around this place — go and chase them. Go on,” 
he added, nudging Crookshanks down the spiral 
staircase with his foot. “Leave Scabbers alone.” 

The noise of the storm was even louder in the 
common room. Harry knew better than to think the 
match would be canceled; Quidditch matches weren’t 
called off for trifles like thunderstorms. Nevertheless, 
he was starting to feel very apprehensive. Wood had 
pointed out Cedric Diggory to him in the corridor; 
Diggory was a fifth year and a lot bigger than Harry. 
Seekers were usually light and speedy, but Diggory’s 
weight would be an advantage in this weather 
because he was less likely to be blown off course. 

Harry whiled away the hours until dawn in front of 
the fire, getting up every now and then to stop 
Crookshanks from sneaking up the boys’ staircase 
again. At long last Harry thought it must be time for 
breakfast, so he headed through the portrait hole 
alone. 

“Stand and fight, you mangy cur!” yelled Sir Cadogan. 
“Oh, shut up,” Harry yawned. 

He revived a bit over a large bowl of porridge, and by 
the time he’d started on toast, the rest of the team 
had turned up. 

“It’s going to be a tough one,” said Wood, who wasn’t 
eating anything. 

“Stop worrying, Oliver,” said Alicia soothingly, “we 
don’t mind a bit of rain.” 

But it was considerably more than a bit of rain. Such 
was the popularity of Quidditch that the whole school 
turned out to watch the match as usual, but they ran 

Page | 194 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




down the lawns toward the Quidditch field, heads 
bowed against the ferocious wind, umbrellas being 
whipped out of their hands as they went. Just before 
he entered the locker room, Harry saw Malfoy, 

Crabbe, and Goyle, laughing and pointing at him from 
under an enormous umbrella on their way to the 
stadium. 

The team changed into their scarlet robes and waited 
for Wood’s usual pre-match pep talk, but it didn’t 
come. He tried to speak several times, made an odd 
gulping noise, then shook his head hopelessly and 
beckoned them to follow him. 

The wind was so strong that they staggered sideways 
as they walked out onto the field. If the crowd was 
cheering, they couldn’t hear it over the fresh rolls of 
thunder. Rain was splattering over Harry’s glasses. 
How on earth was he going to see the Snitch in this? 

The Hufflepuffs were approaching from the opposite 
side of the field, wearing canary -yellow robes. The 
Captains walked up to each other and shook hands; 
Diggory smiled at Wood but Wood now looked as 
though he had lockjaw and merely nodded. Harry saw 
Madam Hooch’s mouth form the words, “Mount your 
brooms.” He pulled his right foot out of the mud with 
a squelch and swung it over his Nimbus Two 
Thousand. Madam Hooch put her whistle to her lips 
and gave it a blast that sounded shrill and distant — 
they were off. 

Harry rose fast, but his Nimbus was swerving slightly 
with the wind. He held it as steady as he could and 
turned, squinting into the rain. 

Within five minutes Harry was soaked to his skin and 
frozen, hardly able to see his teammates, let alone the 
tiny Snitch. He flew backward and forward across the 

Page | 195 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




field past blurred red and yellow shapes, with no idea 
of what was happening in the rest of the game. He 
couldn’t hear the commentary over the wind. The 
crowd was hidden beneath a sea of cloaks and 
battered umbrellas. Twice Harry came very close to 
being unseated by a Bludger; his vision was so 
clouded by the rain on his glasses he hadn’t seen 
them coming. 

He lost track of time. It was getting harder and harder 
to hold his broom straight. The sky was getting 
darker, as though night had decided to come early. 
Twice Harry nearly hit another player, without 
knowing whether it was a teammate or opponent; 
everyone was now so wet, and the rain so thick, he 
could hardly tell them apart. ... 

With the first flash of lightning came the sound of 
Madam Hooch’s whistle; Harry could just see the 
outline of Wood through the thick rain, gesturing him 
to the ground. The whole team splashed down into 
the mud. 

“I called for time-out!” Wood roared at his team. 

“Come on, under here — ” 

They huddled at the edge of the field under a large 
umbrella; Harry took off his glasses and wiped them 
hurriedly on his robes. 

“What’s the score?” 

“We’re fifty points up,” said Wood, “but unless we get 
the Snitch soon, we’ll be playing into the night.” 

“I’ve got no chance with these on,” Harry said 
exasperatedly, waving his glasses. 



Page | 196 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




At that very moment, Hermione appeared at his 
shoulder; she was holding her cloak over her head 
and was, inexplicably, beaming. 

“I’ve had an idea, Harry! Give me your glasses, quick!” 

He handed them to her, and as the team watched in 
amazement, Hermione tapped them with her wand 
and said, “Imperviusl” 

“There!” she said, handing them back to Harry. 
“They’ll repel water!” 

Wood looked as though he could have kissed her. 

“Brilliant!” he called hoarsely after her as she 
disappeared into the crowd. “Okay, team, let’s go for 
it!” 



Hermione ’s spell had done the trick. Harry was still 
numb with cold, still wetter than he’d ever been in his 
life, but he could see. Full of fresh determination, he 
urged his broom through the turbulent air, staring in 
every direction for the Snitch, avoiding a Bludger, 
ducking beneath Diggory, who was streaking in the 
opposite direction. ... 

There was another clap of thunder, followed 
immediately by forked lightning. This was getting 
more and more dangerous. Harry needed to get the 
Snitch quickly — 

He turned, intending to head back toward the middle 
of the field, but at that moment, another flash of 
lightning illuminated the stands, and Harry saw 
something that distracted him completely — the 
silhouette of an enormous shaggy black dog, clearly 
imprinted against the sky, motionless in the topmost, 
empty row of seats. 

Page | 197 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry’s numb hands slipped on the broom handle 
and his Nimbus dropped a few feet. Shaking his 
sodden bangs out of his eyes, he squinted back into 
the stands. The dog had vanished. 

“Harry!” came Wood’s anguished yell from the 
Gryffindor goal posts. “Harry, behind you!” 

Harry looked wildly around. Cedric Diggory was 
pelting up the field, and a tiny speck of gold was 
shimmering in the rain-filled air between them — 

With a jolt of panic, Harry threw himself flat to the 
broom-handle and zoomed toward the Snitch. 

“Come on!” he growled at his Nimbus as the rain 
whipped his face. “Fasteri” 

But something odd was happening. An eerie silence 
was falling across the stadium. The wind, though as 
strong as ever, was forgetting to roar. It was as 
though someone had turned off the sound, as though 
Harry had gone suddenly deaf — what was going on? 

And then a horribly familiar wave of cold swept over 
him, inside him, just as he became aware of 
something moving on the field below. . . . 

Before he’d had time to think, Harry had taken his 
eyes off the Snitch and looked down. 

At least a hundred dementors, their hidden faces 
pointing up at him, were standing beneath him. It 
was as though freezing water were rising in his chest, 
cutting at his insides. And then he heard it again. ... 
Someone was screaming, screaming inside his head 
... a woman . . . 

“Not Harry, not Harry, please not Harry\” 

Page | 198 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ Stand aside, you silly girl ... stand aside, now. ...” 



“ Not Harry, please no, take me, kill me instead — ” 

Numbing, swirling white mist was filling Harry’s 
brain. . . . What was he doing? Why was he flying? He 
needed to help her. ... She was going to die. ... She 
was going to be murdered. ... 

He was falling, falling through the icy mist. 

“Not Harry\ Please ... have mercy ... have mercy. ...” 

A shrill voice was laughing, the woman was 
screaming, and Harry knew no more. 

“Lucky the ground was so soft.” 

“I thought he was dead for sure.” 

“But he didn’t even break his glasses.” 

Harry could hear the voices whispering, but they 
made no sense whatsoever. He didn’t have a clue 
where he was, or how he’d got there, or what he’d 
been doing before he got there. All he knew was that 
every inch of him was aching as though it had been 
beaten. 

“That was the scariest thing I’ve ever seen in my life.” 

Scariest . . . the scariest thing . . . hooded black figures 
... cold ... screaming ... 

Harry’s eyes snapped open. He was lying in the 
hospital wing. The Gryffindor Quidditch team, 
spattered with mud from head to foot, was gathered 
around his bed. Ron and Hermione were also there, 

Page | 199 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




looking as though they’d just climbed out of a 
swimming pool. 

“Harry!” said Fred, who looked extremely white 
underneath the mud. “How’re you feeling?” 

It was as though Harry’s memory was on fast forward. 
The lightning — the Grim — the Snitch — and the 
dementors ... 

“What happened?” he said, sitting up so suddenly 
they all gasped. 

“You fell off,” said Fred. “Must’ve been — what — fifty 
feet?” 

“We thought you’d died,” said Alicia, who was 
shaking. 

Hermione made a small, squeaky noise. Her eyes were 
extremely bloodshot. 

“But the match,” said Harry. “What happened? Are we 
doing a replay?” 

No one said anything. The horrible truth sank into 
Harry like a stone. 

“We didn’t — lose?” 

“Diggory got the Snitch,” said George. “Just after you 
fell. He didn’t realize what had happened. When he 
looked back and saw you on the ground, he tried to 
call it off. Wanted a rematch. But they won fair and 
square ... even Wood admits it.” 

“Where is Wood?” said Harry, suddenly realizing he 
wasn’t there. 



Page | 200 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Still in the showers,” said Fred. “We think he’s trying 
to drown himself.” 

Harry put his face to his knees, his hands gripping 
his hair. Fred grabbed his shoulder and shook it 
roughly. 

“C’mon, Harry, you’ve never missed the Snitch 
before.” 

“There had to be one time you didn’t get it,” said 
George. 

“It’s not over yet,” said Fred. “We lost by a hundred 
points, right? So if Hufflepuff loses to Ravenclaw and 
we beat Ravenclaw and Slytherin ...” 

“Hufflepuff’ll have to lose by at least two hundred 
points,” said George. 

“But if they beat Ravenclaw ...” 

“No way, Ravenclaw is too good. But if Slytherin loses 
against Hufflepuff ...” 

“It all depends on the points — a margin of a hundred 
either way — ” 

Harry lay there, not saying a word. They had lost ... 
for the first time ever, he had lost a Quidditch match. 

After ten minutes or so, Madam Pomfrey came over to 
tell the team to leave him in peace. 

“Well come and see you later,” Fred told him. “Don’t 
beat yourself up, Harry, you’re still the best Seeker 
we’ve ever had.” 



Page | 201 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The team trooped out, trailing mud behind them. 
Madam Pomfrey shut the door behind them, looking 
disapproving. Ron and Hermione moved nearer to 
Harry’s bed. 

“Dumbledore was really angry,” Hermione said in a 
quaking voice. “I’ve never seen him like that before. 

He ran onto the field as you fell, waved his wand, and 
you sort of slowed down before you hit the ground. 
Then he whirled his wand at the dementors. Shot 
silver stuff at them. They left the stadium right away. 
... He was furious they’d come onto the grounds. We 
heard him — ” 

“Then he magicked you onto a stretcher,” said Ron. 
“And walked up to school with you floating on it. 
Everyone thought you were ...” 

His voice faded, but Harry hardly noticed. He was 
thinking about what the dementors had done to him 
... about the screaming voice. He looked up and saw 
Ron and Hermione looking at him so anxiously that 
he quickly cast around for something matter-of-fact to 
say. 

“Did someone get my Nimbus?” 

Ron and Hermione looked quickly at each other. 

“Er — ” 



“What?” said Harry, looking from one to the other. 

“Well ... when you fell off, it got blown away,” said 
Hermione hesitantly. 

“And?” 



Page | 202 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“And it hit — it hit — oh, Harry — it hit the 
Whomping Willow.” 

Harry’s insides lurched. The Whomping Willow was a 
very violent tree that stood alone in the middle of the 
grounds. 

“And?” he said, dreading the answer. 

“Well, you know the Whomping Willow,” said Ron. “It 
— it doesn’t like being hit.” 

“Professor Flitwick brought it back just before you 
came around,” said Hermione in a very small voice. 

Slowly, she reached down for a bag at her feet, turned 
it upside down, and tipped a dozen bits of splintered 
wood and twig onto the bed, the only remains of 
Harry’s faithful, finally beaten broomstick. 



Page | 203 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




10 




THE MARAUDER’S MAP 

Madam Pomfrey insisted on keeping Harry in the 
hospital wing for the rest of the weekend. He didn’t 
argue or complain, but he wouldn’t let her throw 
away the shattered remnants of his Nimbus Two 
Thousand. He knew he was being stupid, knew that 
the Nimbus was beyond repair, but Harry couldn’t 
help it; he felt as though he’d lost one of his best 
friends. 

He had a stream of visitors, all intent on cheering him 
up. Hagrid sent him a bunch of earwiggy flowers that 
looked like yellow cabbages, and Ginny Weasley, 
blushing furiously, turned up with a get-well card she 
had made herself, which sang shrilly unless Harry 
kept it shut under his bowl of fruit. The Gryffindor 
team visited again on Sunday morning, this time 
accompanied by Wood, who told Harry (in a hollow, 
dead sort of voice) that he didn’t blame him in the 
slightest. Ron and Hermione left Harry’s bedside only 
at night. But nothing anyone said or did could make 
Harry feel any better, because they knew only half of 
what was troubling him. 

Page | 204 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



He hadn’t told anyone about the Grim, not even Ron 
and Hermione, because he knew Ron would panic 
and Hermione would scoff. The fact remained, 
however, that it had now appeared twice, and both 
appearances had been followed by near-fatal 
accidents; the first time, he had nearly been run over 
by the Knight Bus; the second, fallen fifty feet from 
his broomstick. Was the Grim going to haunt him 
until he actually died? Was he going to spend the rest 
of his life looking over his shoulder for the beast? 

And then there were the dementors. Harry felt sick 
and humiliated every time he thought of them. 
Everyone said the dementors were horrible, but no 
one else collapsed every time they went near one. No 
one else heard echoes in their head of their dying 
parents. 

Because Harry knew who that screaming voice 
belonged to now. He had heard her words, heard 
them over and over again during the night hours in 
the hospital wing while he lay awake, staring at the 
strips of moonlight on the ceiling. When the 
dementors approached him, he heard the last 
moments of his mother’s life, her attempts to protect 
him, Harry, from Lord Voldemort, and Voldemort’s 
laughter before he murdered her. . . . Harry dozed 
fitfully, sinking into dreams full of clammy, rotted 
hands and petrified pleading, jerking awake to dwell 
again on his mother’s voice. 

It was a relief to return to the noise and bustle of the 
main school on Monday, where he was forced to think 
about other things, even if he had to endure Draco 
Malfoy’s taunting. Malfoy was almost beside himself 
with glee at Gryffindor’s defeat. He had finally taken 
off his bandages, and celebrated having the full use of 
both arms again by doing spirited imitations of Harry 
falling off his broom. Malfoy spent much of their next 
Page | 205 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Potions class doing dementor imitations across the 
dungeon; Ron finally cracked and flung a large, 
slippery crocodile heart at Malfoy, which hit him in 
the face and caused Snape to take fifty points from 
Gryffindor. 

“If Snape’s teaching Defense Against the Dark Arts 
again, I’m skiving off,” said Ron as they headed 
toward Lupin’s classroom after lunch. “Check who’s 
in there, Hermione.” 

Hermione peered around the classroom door. 

“It’s okay!” 

Professor Lupin was back at work. It certainly looked 
as though he had been ill. His old robes were hanging 
more loosely on him and there were dark shadows 
beneath his eyes; nevertheless, he smiled at the class 
as they took their seats, and they burst at once into 
an explosion of complaints about Snape’s behavior 
while Lupin had been ill. 

“It’s not fair, he was only filling in, why should he give 
us homework?” 

“We don’t know anything about werewolves — ” 

“ — two rolls of parchment!” 

“Did you tell Professor Snape we haven’t covered them 
yet?” Lupin asked, frowning slightly. 

The babble broke out again. 

“Yes, but he said we were really behind — ” 

“ — he wouldn’t listen — ” 



Page | 206 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ — two rolls of parchmenti” 



Professor Lupin smiled at the look of indignation on 
every face. 

“Don’t worry. I’ll speak to Professor Snape. You don’t 
have to do the essay.” 

“Oh no,” said Hermione, looking very disappointed. 
“I’ve already finished it!” 

They had a very enjoyable lesson. Professor Lupin 
had brought along a glass box containing a 
hinkypunk, a little one-legged creature who looked as 
though he were made of wisps of smoke, rather frail 
and harmless-looking. 

“Lures travelers into bogs,” said Professor Lupin as 
they took notes. “You notice the lantern dangling from 
his hand? Hops ahead — people follow the light — 
then — ’ ” 

The hinkypunk made a horrible squelching noise 
against the glass. 

When the bell rang, everyone gathered up their things 
and headed for the door, Harry among them, but — 

“Wait a moment, Harry,” Lupin called. “I’d like a 
word.” 

Harry doubled back and watched Professor Lupin 
covering the hinkypunk’s box with a cloth. 

“I heard about the match,” said Lupin, turning back 
to his desk and starting to pile books into his 
briefcase, “and I’m sorry about your broomstick. Is 
there any chance of fixing it?” 

Page | 207 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“No,” said Harry. “The tree smashed it to bits.” 

Lupin sighed. 

“They planted the Whomping Willow the same year 
that I arrived at Hogwarts. People used to play a 
game, trying to get near enough to touch the trunk. In 
the end, a boy called Davey Gudgeon nearly lost an 
eye, and we were forbidden to go near it. No 
broomstick would have a chance. 

“Did you hear about the dementors too?” said Harry 
with difficulty. 

Lupin looked at him quickly. 

“Yes, I did. I don’t think any of us have seen Professor 
Dumbledore that angry. They have been growing 
restless for some time ... furious at his refusal to let 
them inside the grounds. ... I suppose they were the 
reason you fell?” 

“Yes,” said Harry. He hesitated, and then the question 
he had to ask burst from him before he could stop 
himself. “ Why? Why do they affect me like that? Am I 
just — ?” 



“It has nothing to do with weakness,” said Professor 
Lupin sharply, as though he had read Harry’s mind. 
“The dementors affect you worse than the others 
because there are horrors in your past that the others 
don’t have.” 

A ray of wintery sunlight fell across the classroom, 
illuminating Lupin’s gray hairs and the lines on his 
young face. 

“Dementors are among the foulest creatures that walk 
this earth. They infest the darkest, filthiest places, 

Page | 208 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




they glory in decay and despair, they drain peace, 
hope, and happiness out of the air around them. 

Even Muggles feel their presence, though they can’t 
see them. Get too near a dementor and every good 
feeling, every happy memory will be sucked out of 
you. If it can, the dementor will feed on you long 
enough to reduce you to something like itself . . . soul- 
less and evil. You’ll be left with nothing but the worst 
experiences of your life. And the worst that happened 
to you, Harry, is enough to make anyone fall off their 
broom. You have nothing to feel ashamed of.” 

“When they get near me — ” Harry stared at Lupin’s 
desk, his throat tight. “I can hear Voldemort 
murdering my mum.” 

Lupin made a sudden motion with his arm as though 
to grip Harry’s shoulder, but thought better of it. 

There was a moment’s silence, then — 

“Why did they have to come to the match?” said Harry 
bitterly. 

“They’re getting hungry,” said Lupin coolly, shutting 
his briefcase with a snap. “Dumbledore won’t let them 
into the school, so their supply of human prey has 
dried up. ... I don’t think they could resist the large 
crowd around the Quidditch field. All that excitement 
. . . emotions running high ... it was their idea of a 
feast.” 

“Azkaban must be terrible,” Harry muttered. Lupin 
nodded grimly. 

“The fortress is set on a tiny island, way out to sea, 
but they don’t need walls and water to keep the 
prisoners in, not when they’re all trapped inside their 
own heads, incapable of a single cheerful thought. 
Most of them go mad within weeks.” 

Page | 209 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“But Sirius Black escaped from them,” Harry said 
slowly. “He got away. ...” 



Lupin’s briefcase slipped from the desk; he had to 
stoop quickly to catch it. 

“Yes,” he said, straightening up, “Black must have 
found a way to fight them. I wouldn’t have believed it 
possible. ... Dementors are supposed to drain a 
wizard of his powers if he is left with them too long. 



“You made that dementor on the train back off,” said 
Harry suddenly. 

“There are — certain defenses one can use,” said 
Lupin. “But there was only one dementor on the train. 
The more there are, the more difficult it becomes to 
resist.” 

“What defenses?” said Harry at once. “Can you teach 
me?” 

“I don’t pretend to be an expert at fighting dementors, 
Harry ... quite the contrary. ...” 

“But if the dementors come to another Quidditch 
match, I need to be able to fight them — ” 

Lupin looked into Harry’s determined face, hesitated, 
then said, “Well ... all right. I’ll try and help. But it’ll 
have to wait until next term, I’m afraid. I have a lot to 
do before the holidays. I chose a very inconvenient 
time to fall ill.” 

What with the promise of anti-dementor lessons from 
Lupin, the thought that he might never have to hear 
his mother’s death again, and the fact that Ravenclaw 
flattened Hufflepuff in their Quidditch match at the 

Page | 210 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




end of November, Harry’s mood took a definite 
upturn. Gryffindor were not out of the running after 
all, although they could not afford to lose another 
match. Wood became repossessed of his manic 
energy, and worked his team as hard as ever in the 
chilly haze of rain that persisted into December. 

Harry saw no hint of a dementor within the grounds. 
Dumbledore’s anger seemed to be keeping them at 
their stations at the entrances. 

Two weeks before the end of the term, the sky 
lightened suddenly to a dazzling, opaline white and 
the muddy grounds were revealed one morning 
covered in glittering frost. Inside the castle, there was 
a buzz of Christmas in the air. Professor Flitwick, the 
Charms teacher, had already decorated his classroom 
with shimmering lights that turned out to be real, 
fluttering fairies. The students were all happily 
discussing their plans for the holidays. Both Ron and 
Hermione had decided to remain at Hogwarts, and 
though Ron said it was because he couldn’t stand two 
weeks with Percy, and Hermione insisted she needed 
to use the library, Harry wasn’t fooled; they were 
doing it to keep him company, and he was very 
grateful. 

To everyone’s delight except Harry’s, there was to be 
another Hogsmeade trip on the very last weekend of 
the term. 

“We can do all our Christmas shopping there!” said 
Hermione. “Mum and Dad would really love those 
Toothflossing Stringmints from Honeydukes!” 

Resigned to the fact that he would be the only third 
year staying behind again, Harry borrowed a copy of 
Which Broomstick from Wood, and decided to spend 
the day reading up on the different makes. He had 
been riding one of the school brooms at team 
Page | 211 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




practice, an ancient Shooting Star, which was very 
slow and jerky; he definitely needed a new broom of 
his own. 



On the Saturday morning of the Hogsmeade trip, 
Harry bid good-bye to Ron and Hermione, who were 
wrapped in cloaks and scarves, then turned up the 
marble staircase alone, and headed back toward 
Gryffindor Tower. Snow had started to fall outside the 
windows, and the castle was very still and quiet. 

“Psst — Harry!” 

He turned, halfway along the third-floor corridor, to 
see Fred and George peering out at him from behind a 
statue of a humpbacked, one-eyed witch. 

“What are you doing?” said Harry curiously. “How 
come you’re not going to Hogsmeade?” 

“We’ve come to give you a bit of festive cheer before 
we go,” said Fred, with a mysterious wink. “Come in 
here. ...” 

He nodded toward an empty classroom to the left of 
the one-eyed statue. Harry followed Fred and George 
inside. George closed the door quietly and then 
turned, beaming, to look at Harry. 

“Early Christmas present for you, Harry,” he said. 

Fred pulled something from inside his cloak with a 
flourish and laid it on one of the desks. It was a large, 
square, very worn piece of parchment with nothing 
written on it. Harry, suspecting one of Fred and 
George’s jokes, stared at it. 

“What’s that supposed to be?” 

Page | 212 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“This, Harry, is the secret of our success,” said 
George, patting the parchment fondly. 

“It’s a wrench, giving it to you,” said Fred, “but we 
decided last night, your need’s greater than ours.” 

“Anyway, we know it by heart,” said George. “We 
bequeath it to you. We don’t really need it anymore.” 

“And what do I need with a bit of old parchment?” 
said Harry. 

“A bit of old parchment!” said Fred, closing his eyes 
with a grimace as though Harry had mortally offended 
him. “Explain, George.” 

“Well ... when we were in our first year, Harry — 
young, carefree, and innocent — ” 

Harry snorted. He doubted whether Fred and George 
had ever been innocent. 

“ — well, more innocent than we are now — we got 
into a spot of bother with Filch.” 

“We let off a Dungbomb in the corridor and it upset 
him for some reason — ” 

“So he hauled us off to his office and started 
threatening us with the usual — ” 

“ — detention — ” 

“ — disembowelment — ” 

“ — and we couldn’t help noticing a drawer in one of 
his filing cabinets marked Confiscated and Highly 
Dangerous.” 



Page | 213 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t tell me — ” said Harry, starting to grin. 

“Well, what would you’ve done?” said Fred. “George 
caused a diversion by dropping another Dungbomb, I 
whipped the drawer open, and grabbed — this.” 

“It’s not as bad as it sounds, you know,” said George. 
“We don’t reckon Filch ever found out how to work it. 
He probably suspected what it was, though, or he 
wouldn’t have confiscated it.” 

“And you know how to work it?” 

“Oh yes,” said Fred, smirking. “This little beauty’s 
taught us more than all the teachers in this school.” 

“You’re winding me up,” said Harry, looking at the 
ragged old bit of parchment. 

“Oh, are we?” said George. 

He took out his wand, touched the parchment lightly, 
and said, “I solemnly swear that I am up to no good.” 

And at once, thin ink lines began to spread like a 
spider’s web from the point that George’s wand had 
touched. They joined each other, they crisscrossed, 
they fanned into every corner of the parchment; then 
words began to blossom across the top, great, curly 
green words, that proclaimed: 

Messrs. Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and Prongs 

Purveyors of Aids to Magical Mischief-Makers 

are proud to present 

THE MARAUDER’S MAP 



Page | 214 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




It was a map showing every detail of the Hogwarts 
castle and grounds. But the truly remarkable thing 
were the tiny ink dots moving around it, each labeled 
with a name in minuscule writing. Astounded, Harry 
bent over it. A labeled dot in the top left corner 
showed that Professor Dumbledore was pacing his 
study; the caretaker’s cat, Mrs. Norris, was prowling 
the second floor; and Peeves the Poltergeist was 
currently bouncing around the trophy room. And as 
Harry’s eyes traveled up and down the familiar 
corridors, he noticed something else. 

This map showed a set of passages he had never 
entered. And many of them seemed to lead — 

“Right into Hogsmeade,” said Fred, tracing one of 
them with his finger. “There are seven in all. Now, 
Filch knows about these four” — he pointed them out 
— “but we’re sure we’re the only ones who know 
about these. Don’t bother with the one behind the 
mirror on the fourth floor. We used it until last 
winter, but it’s caved in — completely blocked. And 
we don’t reckon anyone’s ever used this one, because 
the Whomping Willow’s planted right over the 
entrance. But this one here, this one leads right into 
the cellar of Honeydukes. We’ve used it loads of times. 
And as you might’ve noticed, the entrance is right 
outside this room, through that one-eyed old crone’s 
hump.” 

“Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and Prongs,” sighed 
George, patting the heading of the map. “We owe 
them so much.” 

“Noble men, working tirelessly to help a new 
generation of law-breakers,” said Fred solemnly. 

“Right,” said George briskly. “Don’t forget to wipe it 
after you’ve used it — ” 

Page | 215 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ — or anyone can read it,” Fred said warningly. 

“Just tap it again and say, ‘Mischief managed!’ And 
it’ll go blank.” 

“So, young Harry,” said Fred, in an uncanny 
impersonation of Percy, “mind you behave yourself.” 

“See you in Honeydukes,” said George, winking. 

They left the room, both smirking in a satisfied sort of 
way. 

Harry stood there, gazing at the miraculous map. He 
watched the tiny ink Mrs. Norris turn left and pause 
to sniff at something on the floor. If Filch really didn’t 
know ... he wouldn’t have to pass the dementors at 
all. ... 

But even as he stood there, flooded with excitement, 
something Harry had once heard Mr. Weasley say 
came floating out of his memory. 

Never trust anything that can think for itself, if you 
can’t see where it keeps its brain. 

This map was one of those dangerous magical objects 
Mr. Weasley had been warning against. ... Aids for 
Magical Mischief-Makers . . . but then, Harry reasoned, 
he only wanted to use it to get into Hogsmeade, it 
wasn’t as though he wanted to steal anything or 
attack anyone ... and Fred and George had been 
using it for years without anything horrible 
happening. ... 

Harry traced the secret passage to Honeydukes with 
his finger. 



Page | 216 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Then, quite suddenly, as though following orders, he 
rolled up the map, stuffed it inside his robes, and 
hurried to the door of the classroom. He opened it a 
couple of inches. There was no one outside. Very 
carefully, he edged out of the room and behind the 
statue of the one-eyed witch. 

What did he have to do? He pulled out the map again 
and saw, to his astonishment, that a new ink figure 
had appeared upon it, labeled Harry Potter. This 
figure was standing exactly where the real Harry was 
standing, about halfway down the third-floor corridor. 
Harry watched carefully. His little ink self appeared to 
be tapping the witch with his minute wand. Harry 
quickly took out his real wand and tapped the statue. 
Nothing happened. He looked back at the map. The 
tiniest speech bubble had appeared next to his figure. 
The word inside said, “ Dissendium.” 

“ Dissendiurrd” Harry whispered, tapping the stone 
witch again. 

At once, the statue’s hump opened wide enough to 
admit a fairly thin person. Harry glanced quickly up 
and down the corridor, then tucked the map away 
again, hoisted himself into the hole headfirst, and 
pushed himself forward. 

He slid a considerable way down what felt like a stone 
slide, then landed on cold, damp earth. He stood up, 
looking around. It was pitch dark. He held up his 
wand, muttered, “Lumos\” and saw that he was in a 
very narrow, low, earthy passageway. He raised the 
map, tapped it with the tip of his wand, and 
muttered, “Mischief managed!” The map went blank 
at once. He folded it carefully, tucked it inside his 
robes, then, heart beating fast, both excited and 
apprehensive, he set off. 



Page | 217 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The passage twisted and turned, more like the burrow 
of a giant rabbit than anything else. Harry hurried 
along it, stumbling now and then on the uneven floor, 
holding his wand out in front of him. 

It took ages, but Harry had the thought of 
Honeydukes to sustain him. After what felt like an 
hour, the passage began to rise. Panting, Harry sped 
up, his face hot, his feet very cold. 

Ten minutes later, he came to the foot of some worn 
stone steps, which rose out of sight above him. 

Careful not to make any noise, Harry began to climb. 
A hundred steps, two hundred steps, he lost count as 
he climbed, watching his feet. ... Then, without 
warning, his head hit something hard. 

It seemed to be a trapdoor. Harry stood there, 
massaging the top of his head, listening. He couldn’t 
hear any sounds above him. Very slowly, he pushed 
the trapdoor open and peered over the edge. 

He was in a cellar, which was full of wooden crates 
and boxes. Harry climbed out of the trapdoor and 
replaced it — it blended so perfectly with the dusty 
floor that it was impossible to tell it was there. Harry 
crept slowly toward the wooden staircase that led 
upstairs. Now he could definitely hear voices, not to 
mention the tinkle of a bell and the opening and 
shutting of a door. 

Wondering what he ought to do, he suddenly heard a 
door open much closer at hand; somebody was about 
to come downstairs. 

“And get another box of Jelly Slugs, dear, they’ve 
nearly cleaned us out — ” said a woman’s voice. 



Page | 218 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




A pair of feet was coming down the staircase. Harry 
leapt behind an enormous crate and waited for the 
footsteps to pass. He heard the man shifting boxes 
against the opposite wall. He might not get another 
chance — 

Quickly and silently, Harry dodged out from his 
hiding place and climbed the stairs; looking back, he 
saw an enormous backside and shiny bald head, 
buried in a box. Harry reached the door at the top of 
the stairs, slipped through it, and found himself 
behind the counter of Honeydukes — he ducked, 
crept sideways, and then straightened up. 

Honeydukes was so crowded with Hogwarts students 
that no one looked twice at Harry. He edged among 
them, looking around, and suppressed a laugh as he 
imagined the look that would spread over Dudley’s 
piggy face if he could see where Harry was now. 

There were shelves upon shelves of the most 
succulent-looking sweets imaginable. Creamy chunks 
of nougat, shimmering pink squares of coconut ice, 
fat, honey-colored toffees; hundreds of different kinds 
of chocolate in neat rows; there was a large barrel of 
Every Flavor Beans, and another of Fizzing Whizbees, 
the levitating sherbert balls that Ron had mentioned; 
along yet another wall were “Special Effects” sweets: 
Drooble’s Best Blowing Gum (which filled a room with 
bluebell-colored bubbles that refused to pop for days), 
the strange, splintery Toothflossing Stringmints, tiny 
black Pepper Imps (“breathe fire for your friends!”), 

Ice Mice (“hear your teeth chatter and squeak!”), 
peppermint creams shaped like toads (“hop 
realistically in the stomach!”), fragile sugar-spun 
quills, and exploding bonbons. 

Harry squeezed himself through a crowd of sixth 
years and saw a sign hanging in the farthest corner of 

Page | 219 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




the shop (UNUSUAL TASTES). Ron and Hermione 
were standing underneath it, examining a tray of 
blood-flavored lollipops. Harry sneaked up behind 
them. 

“Ugh, no, Harry won’t want one of those, they’re for 
vampires, I expect,” Hermione was saying. 

“How about these?” said Ron, shoving ajar of 
Cockroach Clusters under Hermione ’s nose. 

“Definitely not,” said Harry. 

Ron nearly dropped the jar. 

“Harry\” squealed Hermione. “What are you doing 
here? How — how did you — ?” 

“Wow!” said Ron, looking very impressed, “you’ve 
learned to Apparate!” 

“ ’Course I haven’t,” said Harry. He dropped his voice 
so that none of the sixth years could hear him and 
told them all about the Marauder’s Map. 

“How come Fred and George never gave it to me!” said 
Ron, outraged. “I’m their brother!” 

“But Harry isn’t going to keep it!” said Hermione, as 
though the idea were ludicrous. “He’s going to hand it 
in to Professor McGonagall, aren’t you, Harry?” 

“No, I’m not!” said Harry. 

“Are you mad?” said Ron, goggling at Hermione. 

“Hand in something that good?” 

“If I hand it in, I’ll have to say where I got it! Filch 
would know Fred and George had nicked it!” 

Page | 220 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“But what about Sirius Black?” Hermione hissed. “He 
could be using one of the passages on that map to get 
into the castle! The teachers have got to know!” 

“He can’t be getting in through a passage,” said Harry 
quickly. “There are seven secret tunnels on the map, 
right? Fred and George reckon Filch already knows 
about four of them. And of the other three — one of 
them’s caved in, so no one can get through it. One of 
them’s got the Whomping Willow planted over the 
entrance, so you can’t get out of it. And the one I just 
came through — well — it’s really hard to see the 
entrance to it down in the cellar, so unless he knew it 
was there ...” 

Harry hesitated. What if Black did know the passage 
was there? Ron, however, cleared his throat 
significantly, and pointed to a notice pasted on the 
inside of the sweetshop door. 

— BY ORDER OF — 

THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC 

Customers are reminded that until further notice, 
dementors will be patrolling the streets of Hogsmeade 
every night after sundown. This measure has been put 
in place for the safety of Hogsmeade residents and will 
be lifted upon the recapture of Sirius Black. It is 
therefore advisable that you complete your shopping 
well before nightfall. 

Merry Christmas! 



“See?” said Ron quietly. “I’d like to see Black try and 
break into Honeydukes with dementors swarming all 



Page | 221 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




over the village. Anyway, Hermione, the Honeydukes 
owners would hear a break-in, wouldn’t they? They 
live over the shop!” 

“Yes, but — but — ” Hermoine seemed to be struggling 
to find another problem. “Look, Harry still shouldn’t 
be coming into Hogsmeade. He hasn’t got a signed 
form! If anyone finds out, he’ll be in so much trouble! 
And it’s not nightfall yet — what if Sirius Black turns 
up today? Now?” 

“He’d have a job spotting Harry in this,” said Ron, 
nodding through the mullioned windows at the thick, 
swirling snow. “Come on, Hermione, it’s Christmas. 
Harry deserves a break.” 

Hermione bit her lip, looking extremely worried. 

“Are you going to report me?” Harry asked her, 
grinning. 

“Oh — of course not — but honestly, Harry — ” 

“Seen the Fizzing Whizbees, Harry?” said Ron, 
grabbing him and leading him over to their barrel. 
“And the Jelly Slugs? And the Acid Pops? Fred gave 
me one of those when I was seven — it burnt a hole 
right through my tongue. I remember Mum walloping 
him with her broomstick.” Ron stared broodingly into 
the Acid Pop box. “Reckon Fred’d take a bit of 
Cockroach Cluster if I told him they were peanuts?” 

When Ron and Hermione had paid for all their sweets, 
the three of them left Honeydukes for the blizzard 
outside. 

Hogsmeade looked like a Christmas card; the little 
thatched cottages and shops were all covered in a 
layer of crisp snow; there were holly wreaths on the 

Page | 222 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




doors and strings of enchanted candles hanging in 
the trees. 

Harry shivered; unlike the other two, he didn’t have 
his cloak. They headed up the street, heads bowed 
against the wind, Ron and Hermione shouting 
through their scarves. 

“That’s the post office — ” 

“Zonko’s is up there — ” 

“We could go up to the Shrieking Shack — ” 

“Tell you what,” said Ron, his teeth chattering, “shall 
we go for a butterbeer in the Three Broomsticks?” 

Harry was more than willing; the wind was fierce and 
his hands were freezing, so they crossed the road, 
and in a few minutes were entering the tiny inn. 

It was extremely crowded, noisy, warm, and smoky. A 
curvy sort of woman with a pretty face was serving a 
bunch of rowdy warlocks up at the bar. 

“That’s Madam Rosmerta,” said Ron. “I’ll get the 
drinks, shall I?” he added, going slightly red. 

Harry and Hermione made their way to the back of 
the room, where there was a small, vacant table 
between the window and a handsome Christmas tree, 
which stood next to the fireplace. Ron came back five 
minutes later, carrying three foaming tankards of hot 
butterbeer. 

“Merry Christmas!” he said happily, raising his 
tankard. 



Page | 223 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry drank deeply. It was the most delicious thing 
he’d ever tasted and seemed to heat every bit of him 
from the inside. 

A sudden breeze ruffled his hair. The door of the 
Three Broomsticks had opened again. Harry looked 
over the rim of his tankard and choked. 

Professors McGonagall and Flitwick had just entered 
the pub with a flurry of snowflakes, shortly followed 
by Hagrid, who was deep in conversation with a portly 
man in a lime-green bowler hat and a pinstriped 
cloak — Cornelius Fudge, Minister of Magic. 

In an instant, Ron and Hermione had both placed 
hands on the top of Harry’s head and forced him off 
his stool and under the table. Dripping with 
butterbeer and crouching out of sight, Harry clutched 
his empty tankard and watched the teachers’ and 
Fudge’s feet move toward the bar, pause, then turn 
and walk right toward him. 

Somewhere above him, Hermione whispered, 
“Mobiliarbus\” 

The Christmas tree beside their table rose a few 
inches off the ground, drifted sideways, and landed 
with a soft thump right in front of their table, hiding 
them from view. Staring through the dense lower 
branches, Harry saw four sets of chair legs move back 
from the table right beside theirs, then heard the 
grunts and sighs of the teachers and minister as they 
sat down. 

Next he saw another pair of feet, wearing sparkly 
turquoise high heels, and heard a woman’s voice. 

“A small gillywater — ” 



Page | 224 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Mine,” said Professor McGonagall’s voice. 

“Four pints of mulled mead — ” 

“Ta, Rosmerta,” said Hagrid. 

“A cherry syrup and soda with ice and umbrella — ” 

“Mmm!” said Professor Flitwick, smacking his lips. 

“So you 11 be the red currant rum, Minister.” 

“Thank you, Rosmerta, m’dear,” said Fudge’s voice. 
“Lovely to see you again, I must say. Have one 
yourself, won’t you? Come and join us. ...” 

“Well, thank you very much, Minister.” 

Harry watched the glittering heels march away and 
back again. His heart was pounding uncomfortably in 
his throat. Why hadn’t it occurred to him that this 
was the last weekend of term for the teachers too? 
And how long were they going to sit there? He needed 
time to sneak back into Honeydukes if he wanted to 
return to school tonight. ... Hermione’s leg gave a 
nervous twitch next to him. 

“So, what brings you to this neck of the woods, 
Minister?” came Madam Rosmerta’s voice. 

Harry saw the lower part of Fudge’s thick body twist 
in his chair as though he were checking for 
eavesdroppers. Then he said in a quiet voice, “What 
else, m’dear, but Sirius Black? I daresay you heard 
what happened up at the school at Halloween?” 

“I did hear a rumor,” admitted Madam Rosmerta. 



Page | 225 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Did you tell the whole pub, Hagrid?” said Professor 
McGonagall exasperatedly. 

“Do you think Black’s still in the area, Minister?” 
whispered Madam Rosmerta. 

“I’m sure of it,” said Fudge shortly. 

“You know that the dementors have searched the 
whole village twice?” said Madam Rosmerta, a slight 
edge to her voice. “Scared all my customers away. ... 
It’s very bad for business, Minister.” 

“Rosmerta, m’dear, I don’t like them any more than 
you do,” said Fudge uncomfortably. “Necessary 
precaution ... unfortunate, but there you are. ... I’ve 
just met some of them. They’re in a fury against 
Dumbledore — he won’t let them inside the castle 
grounds.” 

“I should think not,” said Professor McGonagall 
sharply. “How are we supposed to teach with those 
horrors floating around?” 

“Hear, hear!” squeaked tiny Professor Flitwick, whose 
feet were dangling a foot from the ground. 

“All the same,” demurred Fudge, “they are here to 
protect you all from something much worse. ... We all 
know what Black’s capable of. ...” 

“Do you know, I still have trouble believing it,” said 
Madam Rosmerta thoughtfully. “Of all the people to 
go over to the Dark Side, Sirius Black was the last I’d 
have thought ... I mean, I remember him when he was 
a boy at Hogwarts. If you’d told me then what he was 
going to become, I’d have said you’d had too much 
mead.” 



Page | 226 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You don’t know the half of it, Rosmerta,” said Fudge 
gruffly. “The worst he did isn’t widely known.” 

“The worst?” said Madam Rosmerta, her voice alive 
with curiosity. “Worse than murdering all those poor 
people, you mean?” 

“I certainly do,” said Fudge. 

“I can’t believe that. What could possibly be worse?” 

“You say you remember him at Hogwarts, Rosmerta,” 
murmured Professor McGonagall. “Do you remember 
who his best friend was?” 

“Naturally,” said Madam Rosmerta, with a small 
laugh. “Never saw one without the other, did you? The 
number of times I had them in here — ooh, they used 
to make me laugh. Quite the double act, Sirius Black 
and James Potter!” 

Harry dropped his tankard with a loud clunk. Ron 
kicked him. 

“Precisely,” said Professor McGonagall. “Black and 
Potter. Ringleaders of their little gang. Both very 
bright, of course — exceptionally bright, in fact — but 
I don’t think we’ve ever had such a pair of 
troublemakers — ” 

“I dunno,” chuckled Hagrid. “Fred and George 
Weasley could give ’em a run fer their money.” 

“You’d have thought Black and Potter were brothers!” 
chimed in Professor Flitwick. “Inseparable!” 

“Of course they were,” said Fudge. “Potter trusted 
Black beyond all his other friends. Nothing changed 
when they left school. Black was best man when 

Page | 227 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




James married Lily. Then they named him godfather 
to Harry. Harry has no idea, of course. You can 
imagine how the idea would torment him.” 

“Because Black turned out to be in league with You- 
Know-Who?” whispered Madam Rosmerta. 

“Worse even than that, m’dear. ...” Fudge dropped his 
voice and proceeded in a sort of low rumble. “Not 
many people are aware that the Potters knew You- 
Know-Who was after them. Dumbledore, who was of 
course working tirelessly against You-Know-Who, had 
a number of useful spies. One of them tipped him off, 
and he alerted James and Lily at once. He advised 
them to go into hiding. Well, of course, You-Know- 
Who wasn’t an easy person to hide from. Dumbledore 
told them that their best chance was the Fidelius 
Charm.” 

“How does that work?” said Madam Rosmerta, 
breathless with interest. Professor Flitwick cleared his 
throat. 

“An immensely complex spell,” he said squeakily, 
“involving the magical concealment of a secret inside 
a single, living soul. The information is hidden inside 
the chosen person, or Secret-Keeper, and is 
henceforth impossible to find — unless, of course, the 
Secret-Keeper chooses to divulge it. As long as the 
Secret-Keeper refused to speak, You-Know-Who could 
search the village where Lily and James were staying 
for years and never find them, not even if he had his 
nose pressed against their sitting room window!” 

“So Black was the Potters’ Secret-Keeper?” whispered 
Madam Rosmerta. 

“Naturally,” said Professor McGonagall. “James Potter 
told Dumbledore that Black would die rather than tell 

Page | 228 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




where they were, that Black was planning to go into 
hiding himself . . . and yet, Dumbledore remained 
worried. I remember him offering to be the Potters’ 
Secret-Keeper himself.” 

“He suspected Black?” gasped Madam Rosmerta. 

“He was sure that somebody close to the Potters had 
been keeping You-Know-Who informed of their 
movements,” said Professor McGonagall darkly. 
“Indeed, he had suspected for some time that 
someone on our side had turned traitor and was 
passing a lot of information to You-Know-Who.” 

“But James Potter insisted on using Black?” 

“He did,” said Fudge heavily. “And then, barely a week 
after the Fidelius Charm had been performed — ” 

“Black betrayed them?” breathed Madam Rosmerta. 

“He did indeed. Black was tired of his double-agent 
role, he was ready to declare his support openly for 
You-Know-Who, and he seems to have planned this 
for the moment of the Potters’ death. But, as we all 
know, You-Know-Who met his downfall in little Harry 
Potter. Powers gone, horribly weakened, he fled. And 
this left Black in a very nasty position indeed. His 
master had fallen at the very moment when he, Black, 
had shown his true colors as a traitor. He had no 
choice but to run for it — ” 

“Filthy, stinkin’ turncoat!” Hagrid said, so loudly that 
half the bar went quiet. 

“Shh!” said Professor McGonagall. 

“I met him!” growled Hagrid. “I musta bin the last ter 
see him before he killed all them people! It was me 

Page | 229 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




what rescued Harry from Lily an’ James’s house after 
they was killed! Jus’ got him outta the ruins, poor 
little thing, with a great slash across his forehead, an’ 
his parents dead ... an’ Sirius Black turns up, on that 
flyin’ motorbike he used ter ride. Never occurred ter 
me what he was doin’ there. I didn’ know he’d bin Lily 
an’ James’s Secret-Keeper. Thought he’d jus’ heard 
the news o’ You- Know- Who’s attack an’ come ter see 
what he could do. White an’ shakin’, he was. An’ yeh 
know what I did? I COMFORTED THE MURDERIN’ 
TRAITOR!” Hagrid roared. 

“Hagrid, please!” said Professor McGonagall. “Keep 
your voice down!” 

“How was I ter know he wasn’ upset abou’ Lily an’ 
James? It was You-Know-Who he cared abou’! An’ 
then he says, ‘Give Harry ter me, Hagrid, I’m his 
godfather, I’ll look after him — ’ Ha! But I’d had me 
orders from Dumbledore, an’ I told Black no, 
Dumbledore said Harry was ter go ter his aunt an’ 
uncle’s. Black argued, but in the end he gave in. Told 
me ter take his motorbike ter get Harry there. ‘I won’t 
need it anymore,’ he says. 

“I shoulda known there was somethin’ fishy goin’ on 
then. He loved that motorbike, what was he givin’ it 
ter me for? Why wouldn’ he need it anymore? Fact 
was, it was too easy ter trace. Dumbledore knew he’d 
bin the Potters’ Secret-Keeper. Black knew he was 
goin’ ter have ter run fer it that night, knew it was a 
matter o’ hours before the Ministry was after him. 

“But what if I’d given Harry to him, eh? I bet he ’d’ve 
pitched him off the bike halfway out ter sea. His bes’ 
friends’ son! But when a wizard goes over ter the Dark 
Side, there’s nothin’ and no one that matters to ’em 
anymore. ...” 



Page | 230 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




A long silence followed Hagrid ’s story. Then Madam 
Rosmerta said with some satisfaction, “But he didn’t 
manage to disappear, did he? The Ministry of Magic 
caught up with him next day!” 

“Alas, if only we had,” said Fudge bitterly. “It was not 
we who found him. It was little Peter Pettigrew — 
another of the Potters’ friends. Maddened by grief, no 
doubt, and knowing that Black had been the Potters’ 
Secret-Keeper, he went after Black himself.” 

“Pettigrew . . . that fat little boy who was always 
tagging around after them at Hogwarts?” said Madam 
Rosmerta. 

“Hero-worshipped Black and Potter,” said Professor 
McGonagall. “Never quite in their league, talent-wise. 

I was often rather sharp with him. You can imagine 
how I — how I regret that now. ...” She sounded as 
though she had a sudden head cold. 

“There, now, Minerva,” said Fudge kindly, “Pettigrew 
died a hero’s death. Eyewitnesses — Muggles, of 
course, we wiped their memories later — told us how 
Pettigrew cornered Black. They say he was sobbing, 
“Lily and James, Sirius! How could you?’ And then he 
went for his wand. Well, of course, Black was quicker. 
Blew Pettigrew to smithereens. ...” 

Professor McGonagall blew her nose and said thickly, 
“Stupid boy . . . foolish boy ... he was always hopeless 
at dueling ... should have left it to the Ministry. ...” 

“I tell yeh, if I’d got ter Black before little Pettigrew 
did, I wouldn’t’ve messed around with wands — I’d’ve 
ripped him limb — from — limb,” Hagrid growled. 

“You don’t know what you’re talking about, Hagrid,” 
said Fudge sharply. “Nobody but trained Hit Wizards 

Page | 231 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




from the Magical Law Enforcement Squad would have 
stood a chance against Black once he was cornered. I 
was Junior Minister in the Department of Magical 
Catastrophes at the time, and I was one of the first on 
the scene after Black murdered all those people. I — I 
will never forget it. I still dream about it sometimes. A 
crater in the middle of the street, so deep it had 
cracked the sewer below. Bodies everywhere. Muggles 
screaming. And Black standing there laughing, with 
what was left of Pettigrew in front of him ... a heap of 
bloodstained robes and a few — a few fragments — ” 

Fudge’s voice stopped abruptly. There was the sound 
of five noses being blown. 

“Well, there you have it, Rosmerta,” said Fudge 
thickly. “Black was taken away by twenty members of 
the Magical Law Enforcement Squad and Pettigrew 
received the Order of Merlin, First Class, which I 
think was some comfort to his poor mother. Black’s 
been in Azkaban ever since.” 

Madam Rosmerta let out a long sigh. 

“Is it true he’s mad, Minister?” 

“I wish I could say that he was,” said Fudge slowly. “I 
certainly believe his master’s defeat unhinged him for 
a while. The murder of Pettigrew and all those 
Muggles was the action of a cornered and desperate 
man — cruel ... pointless. Yet I met Black on my last 
inspection of Azkaban. You know, most of the 
prisoners in there sit muttering to themselves in the 
dark; there’s no sense in them ... but I was shocked 
at how normal Black seemed. He spoke quite 
rationally to me. It was unnerving. You’d have 
thought he was merely bored — asked if I’d finished 
with my newspaper, cool as you please, said he 
missed doing the crossword. Yes, I was astounded at 
Page | 232 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




how little effect the dementors seemed to be having on 
him — and he was one of the most heavily guarded in 
the place, you know. Dementors outside his door day 
and night.” 

“But what do you think he’s broken out to do?” said 
Madam Rosmerta. “Good gracious, Minister, he isn’t 
trying to rejoin You-Know-Who, is he?” 

“I daresay that is his — er — eventual plan,” said 
Fudge evasively. “But we hope to catch Black long 
before that. I must say, You-Know-Who alone and 
friendless is one thing . . . but give him back his most 
devoted servant, and I shudder to think how quickly 
he’ll rise again. ...” 

There was a small chink of glass on wood. Someone 
had set down their glass. 

“You know, Cornelius, if you’re dining with the 
headmaster, we’d better head back up to the castle,” 
said Professor McGonagall. 

One by one, the pairs of feet in front of Harry took the 
weight of their owners once more; hems of cloaks 
swung into sight, and Madam Rosemerta’s glittering 
heels disappeared behind the bar. The door of the 
Three Broomsticks opened again, there was another 
flurry of snow, and the teachers had disappeared. 

“Harry?” 

Ron’s and Hermione’s faces appeared under the table. 
They were both staring at him, lost for words. 



Page | 233 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






THE FIREBOLT 

Harry didn’t have a very clear idea of how he had 
managed to get back into the Honeydukes cellar, 
through the tunnel, and into the castle once more. All 
he knew was that the return trip seemed to take no 
time at all, and that he hardly noticed what he was 
doing, because his head was still pounding with the 
conversation he had just heard. 

Why had nobody ever told him? Dumbledore, Hagrid, 
Mr. Weasley, Cornelius Fudge ... why hadn’t anyone 
ever mentioned the fact that Harry’s parents had died 
because their best friend had betrayed them? 

Ron and Hermione watched Harry nervously all 
through dinner, not daring to talk about what they’d 
overheard, because Percy was sitting close by them. 
When they went upstairs to the crowded common 
room, it was to find Fred and George had set off half a 
dozen Dungbombs in a fit of end-of-term high spirits. 
Harry, who didn’t want Fred and George asking him 
whether he’d reached Hogsmeade or not, sneaked 
quietly up to the empty dormitory and headed 
Page | 234 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



straight for his bedside cabinet. He pushed his books 
aside and quickly found what he was looking for — 
the leather-bound photo album Hagrid had given him 
two years ago, which was full of wizard pictures of his 
mother and father. He sat down on his bed, drew the 
hangings around him, and started turning the pages, 
searching, until ... 

He stopped on a picture of his parents’ wedding day. 
There was his father waving up at him, beaming, the 
untidy black hair Harry had inherited standing up in 
all directions. There was his mother, alight with 
happiness, arm in arm with his dad. And there ... 
that must be him. Their best man ... Harry had never 
given him a thought before. 

If he hadn’t known it was the same person, he would 
never have guessed it was Black in this old 
photograph. His face wasn’t sunken and waxy, but 
handsome, full of laughter. Had he already been 
working for Voldemort when this picture had been 
taken? Was he already planning the deaths of the two 
people next to him? Did he realize he was facing 
twelve years in Azkaban, twelve years that would 
make him unrecognizable? 

But the dementors don’t affect him, Harry thought, 
staring into the handsome, laughing face. He doesn’t 
have to hear my mum screaming if they get too close — 

Harry slammed the album shut, reached over and 
stuffed it back into his cabinet, took off his robe and 
glasses and got into bed, making sure the hangings 
were hiding him from view. 

The dormitory door opened. 

“Harry?” said Ron’s voice uncertainly. 



Page | 235 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




But Harry lay still, pretending to be asleep. He heard 
Ron leave again, and rolled over on his back, his eyes 
wide open. 

A hatred such as he had never known before was 
coursing through Harry like poison. He could see 
Black laughing at him through the darkness, as 
though somebody had pasted the picture from the 
album over his eyes. He watched, as though 
somebody was playing him a piece of film, Sirius 
Black blasting Peter Pettigrew (who resembled Neville 
Longbottom) into a thousand pieces. He could hear 
(though having no idea what Black’s voice might 
sound like) a low, excited mutter. “It has happened, 
My Lord . . . the Potters have made me their Secret- 
Keeper. ...” And then came another voice, laughing 
shrilly, the same laugh that Harry heard inside his 
head whenever the dementors drew near. . . . 

“Harry, you — you look terrible.” 

Harry hadn’t gotten to sleep until daybreak. He had 
awoken to find the dormitory deserted, dressed, and 
gone down the spiral staircase to a common room 
that was completely empty except for Ron, who was 
eating a Peppermint Toad and massaging his 
stomach, and Hermione, who had spread her 
homework over three tables. 

“Where is everyone?” said Harry. 

“Gone! It’s the first day of the holidays, remember?” 
said Ron, watching Harry closely. “It’s nearly 
lunchtime; I was going to come and wake you up in a 
minute.” 

Harry slumped into a chair next to the fire. Snow was 
still falling outside the windows. Crookshanks was 
spread out in front of the fire like a large, ginger rug. 

Page | 236 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You really don’t look well, you know,” Hermione said, 
peering anxiously into his face. 

“I’m fine,” said Harry. 

“Harry, listen,” said Hermione, exchanging a look with 
Ron, “you must be really upset about what we heard 
yesterday. But the thing is, you mustn’t go doing 
anything stupid.” 

“Like what?” said Harry. 

“Like trying to go after Black,” said Ron sharply. 

Harry could tell they had rehearsed this conversation 
while he had been asleep. He didn’t say anything. 

“You won’t, will you, Harry?” said Hermione. 

“Because Black’s not worth dying for,” said Ron. 

Harry looked at them. They didn’t seem to 
understand at all. 

“D’you know what I see and hear every time a 
dementor gets too near me?” Ron and Hermione 
shook their heads, looking apprehensive. “I can hear 
my mum screaming and pleading with Voldemort. 

And if you’d heard your mum screaming like that, 
just about to be killed, you wouldn’t forget it in a 
hurry. And if you found out someone who was 
supposed to be a friend of hers betrayed her and sent 
Voldemort after her — ” 

“There’s nothing you can do!” said Hermione, looking 
stricken. “The dementors will catch Black and he’ll go 
back to Azkaban and — and serve him right!” 



Page | 237 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You heard what Fudge said. Black isn’t affected by 
Azkaban like normal people are. It’s not a 
punishment for him like it is for the others.” 

“So what are you saying?” said Ron, looking very 
tense. “You want to — to kill Black or something?” 

“Don’t be silly,” said Hermione in a panicky voice. 
“Harry doesn’t want to kill anyone, do you, Harry?” 

Again, Harry didn’t answer. He didn’t know what he 
wanted to do. All he knew was that the idea of doing 
nothing, while Black was at liberty, was almost more 
than he could stand. 

“Malfoy knows,” he said abruptly. “Remember what 
he said to me in Potions? ‘If it was me, I’d hunt him 
down myself. ... I’d want revenge.’ ” 

“You’re going to take Malfoy ’s advice instead of ours?” 
said Ron furiously. “Listen ... you know what 
Pettigrew’s mother got back after Black had finished 
with him? Dad told me — the Order of Merlin, First 
Class, and Pettigrew’s finger in a box. That was the 
biggest bit of him they could find. Black’s a madman, 
Harry, and he’s dangerous — ” 

“Malfoy’s dad must have told him,” said Harry, 
ignoring Ron. “He was right in Voldemort’s inner 
circle — ” 

“ Say You-Knotu-Who, will you?” interjected Ron 
angrily. 

“ — so obviously, the Malfoys knew Black was working 
for Voldemort — ” 

“ — and Malfoy’d love to see you blown into about a 
million pieces, like Pettigrew! Get a grip. Malfoy’s just 

Page | 238 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




hoping you 11 get yourself killed before he has to play 
you at Quidditch.” 

“Harry, please,” said Hermione, her eyes now shining 
with tears, “please be sensible. Black did a terrible, 
terrible thing, but d-don’t put yourself in danger, it’s 
what Black wants. ... Oh, Harry, you’d be playing 
right into Black’s hands if you went looking for him. 
Your mum and dad wouldn’t want you to get hurt, 
would they? They’d never want you to go looking for 
Black!” 

“I’ll never know what they’d have wanted, because 
thanks to Black, I’ve never spoken to them,” said 
Harry shortly. 

There was a silence in which Crookshanks stretched 
luxuriously, flexing his claws. Ron’s pocket quivered. 

“Look,” said Ron, obviously casting around for a 
change of subject, “it’s the holidays! It’s nearly 
Christmas! Let’s — let’s go down and see Hagrid. We 
haven’t visited him for ages!” 

“No!” said Hermione quickly. “Harry isn’t supposed to 
leave the castle, Ron — ” 

“Yeah, let’s go,” said Harry, sitting up, “and I can ask 
him how come he never mentioned Black when he 
told me all about my parents!” 

Further discussion of Sirius Black plainly wasn’t 
what Ron had had in mind. 

“Or we could have a game of chess,” he said hastily, 
“or Gobstones. Percy left a set — ” 

“No, let’s visit Hagrid,” said Harry firmly. 



Page | 239 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




So they got their cloaks from their dormitories and set 
off through the portrait hole (“Stand and fight, you 
yellow-bellied mongrels!”), down through the empty 
castle and out through the oak front doors. 

They made their way slowly down the lawn, making a 
shallow trench in the glittering, powdery snow, their 
socks and the hems of their cloaks soaked and 
freezing. The Forbidden Forest looked as though it 
had been enchanted, each tree smattered with silver, 
and Hagrid’s cabin looked like an iced cake. 

Ron knocked, but there was no answer. 

“He’s not out, is he?” said Hermione, who was 
shivering under her cloak. 

Ron had his ear to the door. 

“There’s a weird noise,” he said. “Listen — is that 
Fang?” 

Harry and Hermione put their ears to the door too. 
From inside the cabin came a series of low, throbbing 
moans. 

“Think we’d better go and get someone?” said Ron 
nervously. 

“Hagrid!” called Harry, thumping the door. “Hagrid, 
are you in there?” 

There was a sound of heavy footsteps, then the door 
creaked open. Hagrid stood there with his eyes red 
and swollen, tears splashing down the front of his 
leather vest. 

“Yeh’ve heard?” he bellowed, and he flung himself 
onto Harry’s neck. 

Page | 240 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid being at least twice the size of a normal man, 
this was no laughing matter. Harry, about to collapse 
under Hagrid’s weight, was rescued by Ron and 
Hermione, who each seized Hagrid under an arm and 
heaved him back into the cabin. Hagrid allowed 
himself to be steered into a chair and slumped over 
the table, sobbing uncontrollably, his face glazed with 
tears that dripped down into his tangled beard. 

“Hagrid, what is it?” said Hermione, aghast. 

Harry spotted an official-looking letter lying open on 
the table. 

“What’s this, Hagrid?” 

Hagrid’s sobs redoubled, but he shoved the letter 
toward Harry, who picked it up and read aloud: 

Dear Mr. Hagrid, 

Further to our inquiry into the attack by a hippogriff on 
a student in your class, we have accepted the 
assurances of Professor Dumbledore that you bear no 
responsibility for the regrettable incident. 

“Well, that’s okay then, Hagrid!” said Ron, clapping 
Hagrid on the shoulder. But Hagrid continued to sob, 
and waved one of his gigantic hands, inviting Harry to 
read on. 

However, we must register our concern about the 
hippogriff in question. We have decided to uphold the 
official complaint of Mr. Lucius Malfoy, and this matter 
will therefore be taken to the Committee for the 
Disposal of Dangerous Creatures. The hearing will take 
place on April 20th, and we ask you to present 
yourself and your hippogriff at the Committee’s offices 



Page | 241 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




in London on that date. In the meantime, the hippogriff 
should be kept tethered and isolated. 

Yours in fellowship ... 

There followed a list of the school governors. 

“Oh,” said Ron. “But you said Buckbeak isn’t a bad 
hippogriff, Hagrid. I bet he’ll get off — ” 

“Yeh don’ know them gargoyles at the Committee fer 
the Disposal o’ Dangerous Creatures!” choked Hagrid, 
wiping his eyes on his sleeve. “They’ve got it in fer 
interestin’ creatures!” 

A sudden sound from the corner of Hagrid ’s cabin 
made Harry, Ron, and Hermione whip around. 
Buckbeak the hippogriff was lying in the corner, 
chomping on something that was oozing blood all over 
the floor. 

“I couldn’ leave him tied up out there in the snow!” 
choked Hagrid. “All on his own! At Christmas.” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked at one another. 

They had never seen eye to eye with Hagrid about 
what he called “interesting creatures” and other 
people called “terrifying monsters.” On the other 
hand, there didn’t seem to be any particular harm in 
Buckbeak. In fact, by Hagrid’s usual standards, he 
was positively cute. 

“You’ll have to put up a good strong defense, Hagrid,” 
said Hermione, sitting down and laying a hand on 
Hagrid’s massive forearm. “I’m sure you can prove 
Buckbeak is safe.” 



Page | 242 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Won’t make no difference!” sobbed Hagrid. “Them 
Disposal devils, they’re all in Lucius Malfoy’s pocket! 
Scared o’ him! An’ if I lose the case, Buckbeak — ” 

Hagrid drew his finger swiftly across his throat, then 
gave a great wail and lurched forward, his face in his 
arms. 

“What about Dumbledore, Hagrid?” said Harry. 

“He’s done more’n enough fer me already,” groaned 
Hagrid. “Got enough on his plate what with keepin’ 
them dementors outta the castle, an’ Sirius Black 
lurkin’ around — ” 

Ron and Hermione looked quickly at Harry, as though 
expecting him to start berating Hagrid for not telling 
him the truth about Black. But Harry couldn’t bring 
himself to do it, not now that he saw Hagrid so 
miserable and scared. 

“Listen, Hagrid,” he said, “you can’t give up. 
Hermione’s right, you just need a good defense. You 
can call us as witnesses — ” 

“I’m sure I’ve read about a case of hippogriff-baiting,” 
said Hermione thoughtfully, “where the hippogriff got 
off. I’ll look it up for you, Hagrid, and see exactly what 
happened.” 

Hagrid howled still more loudly. Harry and Hermione 
looked at Ron to help them. 

“Er — shall I make a cup of tea?” said Ron. 

Harry stared at him. 

“It’s what my mum does whenever someone’s upset,” 
Ron muttered, shrugging. 

Page | 243 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




At last, after many more assurances of help, with a 
steaming mug of tea in front of him, Hagrid blew his 
nose on a handkerchief the size of a tablecloth and 
said, “Yer right. I can’ afford to go ter pieces. Gotta 
pull meself together. ...” 

Fang the boarhound came timidly out from under the 
table and laid his head on Hagrid ’s knee. 

“I’ve not bin meself lately,” said Hagrid, stroking Fang 
with one hand and mopping his face with the other. 
“Worried abou’ Buckbeak, an’ no one likin’ me classes 



“We do like them!” lied Hermione at once. 

“Yeah, they’re great!” said Ron, crossing his fingers 
under the table. “Er — how are the flobberworms?” 

“Dead,” said Hagrid gloomily. “Too much lettuce.” 

“Oh no!” said Ron, his lip twitching. 

“An’ them dementors make me feel ruddy terrible an’ 
all,” said Hagrid, with a sudden shudder. “Gotta walk 
past ’em ev’ry time I want a drink in the Three 
Broomsticks. ’S like bein’ back in Azkaban — ” 

He fell silent, gulping his tea. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione watched him breathlessly. They had never 
heard Hagrid talk about his brief spell in Azkaban 
before. After a pause, Hermione said timidly, “Is it 
awful in there, Hagrid?” 

“Yeh’ve no idea,” said Hagrid quietly. “Never bin 
anywhere like it. Thought I was goin’ mad. Kep’ goin’ 
over horrible stuff in me mind . . . the day I got 
expelled from Hogwarts . . . day me dad died . . . day I 
had ter let Norbert go. ...” 

Page | 244 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




His eyes filled with tears. Norbert was the baby 
dragon Hagrid had once won in a game of cards. 



“Yeh can’ really remember who yeh are after a while. 
An’ yeh can’ see the point o’ livin’ at all. I used ter 
hope I’d jus’ die in me sleep. ... When they let me out, 
it was like bein’ born again, ev’rythin’ came floodin’ 
back, it was the bes’ feelin’ in the world. Mind, the 
dementors weren’t keen on lettin’ me go.” 

“But you were innocent!” said Hermione. 

Hagrid snorted. 

“Think that matters to them? They don’ care. Long as 
they’ve got a couple o’ hundred humans stuck there 
with ’em, so they can leech all the happiness out of 
’em, they don’ give a damn who’s guilty an’ who’s 
not.” 

Hagrid went quiet for a moment, staring into his tea. 
Then he said quietly, “Thought o’ jus’ letting 
Buckbeak go ... tryin’ ter make him fly away ... but 
how d’yeh explain ter a hippogriff it’s gotta go inter 
hidin’? An’ — an’ I’m scared o’ breakin’ the law. ...” He 
looked up at them, tears leaking down his face again. 
“I don’ ever want ter go back ter Azkaban.” 

The trip to Hagrid’s, though far from fun, had 
nevertheless had the effect Ron and Hermione had 
hoped. Though Harry had by no means forgotten 
about Black, he couldn’t brood constantly on revenge 
if he wanted to help Hagrid win his case against the 
Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures. 
He, Ron, and Hermione went to the library the next 
day and returned to the empty common room laden 
with books that might help prepare a defense for 
Buckbeak. The three of them sat in front of the 
roaring fire, slowly turning the pages of dusty 
Page | 245 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




volumes about famous cases of marauding beasts, 
speaking occasionally when they ran across 
something relevant. 

“Here’s something ... there was a case in 1722 ... but 
the hippogriff was convicted — ugh, look what they 
did to it, that’s disgusting — ” 

“This might help, look — a manticore savaged 
someone in 1296, and they let the manticore off — oh 
— no, that was only because everyone was too scared 
to go near it. ...” 

Meanwhile, in the rest of the castle, the usual 
magnificent Christmas decorations had been put up, 
despite the fact that hardly any of the students 
remained to enjoy them. Thick streamers of holly and 
mistletoe were strung along the corridors, mysterious 
lights shone from inside every suit of armor, and the 
Great Hall was filled with its usual twelve Christmas 
trees, glittering with golden stars. A powerful and 
delicious smell of cooking pervaded the corridors, and 
by Christmas Eve, it had grown so strong that even 
Scabbers poked his nose out of the shelter of Ron’s 
pocket to sniff hopefully at the air. 

On Christmas morning, Harry was woken by Ron 
throwing his pillow at him. 

“Oy! Presents!” 

Harry reached for his glasses and put them on, 
squinting through the semi-darkness to the foot of his 
bed, where a small heap of parcels had appeared. Ron 
was already ripping the paper off his own presents. 

“Another sweater from Mum . . . maroon again . . . see if 
you’ve got one.” 



Page | 246 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry had. Mrs. Weasley had sent him a scarlet 
sweater with the Gryffindor lion knitted on the front, 
also a dozen home-baked mince pies, some Christmas 
cake, and a box of nut brittle. As he moved all these 
things aside, he saw a long, thin package lying 
underneath. 

“What’s that?” said Ron, looking over, a freshly 
unwrapped pair of maroon socks in his hand. 

“Dunno ...” 

Harry ripped the parcel open and gasped as a 
magnificent, gleaming broomstick rolled out onto his 
bedspread. Ron dropped his socks and jumped off his 
bed for a closer look. 

“I don’t believe it,” he said hoarsely. 

It was a Firebolt, identical to the dream broom Harry 
had gone to see every day in Diagon Alley. Its handle 
glittered as he picked it up. He could feel it vibrating 
and let go; it hung in midair, unsupported, at exactly 
the right height for him to mount it. His eyes moved 
from the golden registration number at the top of the 
handle, right down to the perfectly smooth, 
streamlined birch twigs that made up the tail. 

“Who sent it to you?” said Ron in a hushed voice. 

“Look and see if there’s a card,” said Harry. 

Ron ripped apart the Firebolt’s wrappings. 

“Nothing! Blimey, who’d spend that much on you?” 

“Well,” said Harry, feeling stunned, “I’m betting it 
wasn’t the Dursleys.” 



Page | 247 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I bet it was Dumbledore,” said Ron, now walking 
around and around the Firebolt, taking in every 
glorious inch. “He sent you the Invisibility Cloak 
anonymously. ...” 

“That was my dad’s, though,” said Harry. 
“Dumbledore was just passing it on to me. He 
wouldn’t spend hundreds of Galleons on me. He can’t 
go giving students stuff like this — ” 

“That’s why he wouldn’t say it was from him!” said 
Ron. “In case some git like Malfoy said it was 
favoritism. Hey, Harry” — Ron gave a great whoop of 
laughter — “Malfoyl Wait till he sees you on this! He’ll 
be sick as a pig! This is an international standard 
broom, this is!” 

“I can’t believe this,” Harry muttered, running a hand 
along the Firebolt, while Ron sank onto Harry’s bed, 
laughing his head off at the thought of Malfoy. “ Who 
— ?” 

“I know,” said Ron, controlling himself, “I know who it 
could’ve been — Lupin!” 

“What?” said Harry, now starting to laugh himself. 
“Lupin? Listen, if he had this much gold, he’d be able 
to buy himself some new robes.” 

“Yeah, but he likes you,” said Ron. “And he was away 
when your Nimbus got smashed, and he might’ve 
heard about it and decided to visit Diagon Alley and 
get this for you — ” 

“What d’you mean, he was away?” said Harry. “He 
was ill when I was playing in that match.” 



Page | 248 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, he wasn’t in the hospital wing,” said Ron. “I 
was there, cleaning out the bedpans on that detention 
from Snape, remember?” 

Harry frowned at Ron. 

“I can’t see Lupin affording something like this.” 

“What ’re you two laughing about?” 

Hermione had just come in, wearing her dressing 
gown and carrying Crookshanks, who was looking 
very grumpy, with a string of tinsel tied around his 
neck. 

“Don’t bring him in here!” said Ron, hurriedly 
snatching Scabbers from the depths of his bed and 
stowing him in his pajama pocket. But Hermione 
wasn’t listening. She dropped Crookshanks onto 
Seamus’s empty bed and stared, open-mouthed, at 
the Firebolt. 

“Oh, Harry\ Who sent you that?” 

“No idea,” said Harry. “There wasn’t a card or 
anything with it.” 

To his great surprise, Hermione did not appear either 
excited or intrigued by the news. On the contrary, her 
face fell, and she bit her lip. 

“What’s the matter with you?” said Ron. 

“I don’t know,” said Hermione slowly, “but it’s a bit 
odd, isn’t it? I mean, this is supposed to be quite a 
good broom, isn’t it?” 

Ron sighed exasperatedly. 



Page | 249 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s the best broom there is, Hermione,” he said. 

“So it must’ve been really expensive. ...” 

“Probably cost more than all the Slytherins’ brooms 
put together,” said Ron happily. 

“Well ... who’d send Harry something as expensive as 
that, and not even tell him they’d sent it?” said 
Hermione. 

“Who cares?” said Ron impatiently. “Listen, Harry, 
can I have a go on it? Can I?” 

“I don’t think anyone should ride that broom just yet!” 
said Hermione shrilly. 

Harry and Ron looked at her. 

“What d’you think Harry’s going to do with it — sweep 
the floor?” said Ron. 

But before Hermione could answer, Crookshanks 
sprang from Seamus’s bed, right at Ron’s chest. 

“GET — HIM — OUT — OF — HERE!” Ron bellowed 
as Crookshanks ’s claws ripped his pajamas and 
Scabbers attempted a wild escape over his shoulder. 
Ron seized Scabbers by the tail and aimed a 
misjudged kick at Crookshanks that hit the trunk at 
the end of Harry’s bed, knocking it over and causing 
Ron to hop up and down, howling with pain. 

Crookshanks ’s fur suddenly stood on end. A shrill, 
tinny whistling was filling the room. The Pocket 
Sneakoscope had become dislodged from Uncle 
Vernon’s old socks and was whirling and gleaming on 
the floor. 



Page | 250 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I forgot about that!” Harry said, bending down and 
picking up the Sneakoscope. “I never wear those 
socks if I can help it. ...” 

The Sneakoscope whirled and whistled in his palm. 
Crookshanks was hissing and spitting at it. 

“You’d better take that cat out of here, Hermione,” 
said Ron furiously, sitting on Harry’s bed nursing his 
toe. “Can’t you shut that thing up?” he added to 
Harry as Hermione strode out of the room, 
Crookshanks ’s yellow eyes still fixed maliciously on 
Ron. 

Harry stuffed the Sneakoscope back inside the socks 
and threw it back into his trunk. All that could be 
heard now were Ron’s stifled moans of pain and rage. 
Scabbers was huddled in Ron’s hands. It had been a 
while since Harry had seen him out of Ron’s pocket, 
and he was unpleasantly surprised to see that 
Scabbers, once so fat, was now very skinny; patches 
of fur seemed to have fallen out too. 

“He’s not looking too good, is he?” Harry said. 

“It’s stress!” said Ron. “He’d be fine if that big stupid 
furball left him alone!” 

But Harry, remembering what the woman at the 
Magical Menagerie had said about rats living only 
three years, couldn’t help feeling that unless Scabbers 
had powers he had never revealed, he was reaching 
the end of his life. And despite Ron’s frequent 
complaints that Scabbers was both boring and 
useless, he was sure Ron would be very miserable if 
Scabbers died. 

Christmas spirit was definitely thin on the ground in 
the Gryffindor common room that morning. Hermione 

Page | 251 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




had shut Crookshanks in her dormitory, but was 
furious with Ron for trying to kick him; Ron was still 
fuming about Crookshanks ’s fresh attempt to eat 
Scabbers. Harry gave up trying to make them talk to 
each other and devoted himself to examining the 
Firebolt, which he had brought down to the common 
room with him. For some reason this seemed to 
annoy Hermione as well; she didn’t say anything, but 
she kept looking darkly at the broom as though it too 
had been criticizing her cat. 

At lunchtime they went down to the Great Hall, to 
find that the House tables had been moved against 
the walls again, and that a single table, set for twelve, 
stood in the middle of the room. Professors 
Dumbledore, McGonagall, Snape, Sprout, and 
Flitwick were there, along with Filch, the caretaker, 
who had taken off his usual brown coat and was 
wearing a very old and rather moldy-looking tailcoat. 
There were only three other students, two extremely 
nervous-looking first years and a sullen-faced 
Slytherin fifth year. 

“Merry Christmas!” said Dumbledore as Harry, Ron, 
and Hermione approached the table. “As there are so 
few of us, it seemed foolish to use the House tables. 

... Sit down, sit down!” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione sat down side by side at 
the end of the table. 

“Crackers!” said Dumbledore enthusiastically, offering 
the end of a large silver noisemaker to Snape, who 
took it reluctantly and tugged. With a bang like a 
gunshot, the cracker flew apart to reveal a large, 
pointed witch’s hat topped with a stuffed vulture. 

Harry, remembering the boggart, caught Ron’s eye 
and they both grinned; Snape ’s mouth thinned and 

Page | 252 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




he pushed the hat toward Dumbledore, who swapped 
it for his wizard’s hat at once. 



“Dig in!” he advised the table, beaming around. 

As Harry was helping himself to roast potatoes, the 
doors of the Great Hall opened again. It was Professor 
Trelawney, gliding toward them as though on wheels. 
She had put on a green sequined dress in honor of 
the occasion, making her look more than ever like a 
glittering, oversized dragonfly. 

“Sibyll, this is a pleasant surprise!” said Dumbledore, 
standing up. 

“I have been crystal gazing, Headmaster,” said 
Professor Trelawney in her mistiest, most faraway 
voice, “and to my astonishment, I saw myself 
abandoning my solitary luncheon and coming to join 
you. Who am I to refuse the promptings of fate? I at 
once hastened from my tower, and I do beg you to 
forgive my lateness. ...” 

“Certainly, certainly,” said Dumbledore, his eyes 
twinkling. “Let me draw you up a chair — ” 

And he did indeed draw a chair in midair with his 
wand, which revolved for a few seconds before falling 
with a thud between Professors Snape and 
McGonagall. Professor Trelawney, however, did not sit 
down; her enormous eyes had been roving around the 
table, and she suddenly uttered a kind of soft scream. 

“I dare not, Headmaster! If I join the table, we shall be 
thirteen! Nothing could be more unlucky! Never forget 
that when thirteen dine together, the first to rise will 
be the first to die!” 



Page | 253 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well risk it, Sibyll,” said Professor McGonagall 
impatiently. “Do sit down, the turkey’s getting stone 
cold.” 



Professor Trelawney hesitated, then lowered herself 
into the empty chair, eyes shut and mouth clenched 
tight, as though expecting a thunderbolt to hit the 
table. Professor McGonagall poked a large spoon into 
the nearest tureen. 

“Tripe, Sibyll?” 

Professor Trelawney ignored her. Eyes open again, 
she looked around once more and said, “But where is 
dear Professor Lupin?” 

“I’m afraid the poor fellow is ill again,” said 
Dumbledore, indicating that everybody should start 
serving themselves. “Most unfortunate that it should 
happen on Christmas Day.” 

“But surely you already knew that, Sibyll?” said 
Professor McGonagall, her eyebrows raised. 

Professor Trelawney gave Professor McGonagall a very 
cold look. 

“Certainly I knew, Minerva,” she said quietly. “But 
one does not parade the fact that one is All-Knowing. 

I frequently act as though I am not possessed of the 
Inner Eye, so as not to make others nervous.” 

“That explains a great deal,” said Professor 
McGonagall tartly. 

Professor Trelawney’s voice suddenly became a good 
deal less misty. 



Page | 254 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“If you must know, Minerva, I have seen that poor 
Professor Lupin will not be with us for very long. He 
seems aware, himself, that his time is short. He 
positively fled when I offered to crystal gaze for him — 



“Imagine that,” said Professor McGonagall dryly. 

“I doubt,” said Dumbledore, in a cheerful but slightly 
raised voice, which put an end to Professor 
McGonagall and Professor Trelawney’s conversation, 
“that Professor Lupin is in any immediate danger. 
Severus, you’ve made the potion for him again?” 

“Yes, Headmaster,” said Snape. 

“Good,” said Dumbledore. “Then he should be up and 
about in no time. ... Derek, have you had any of these 
chipolatas? They’re excellent.” 

The first-year boy went furiously red on being 
addressed directly by Dumbledore, and took the 
platter of sausages with trembling hands. 

Professor Trelawney behaved almost normally until 
the very end of Christmas dinner, two hours later. 

Full to bursting with Christmas dinner and still 
wearing their party hats, Harry and Ron got up first 
from the table and she shrieked loudly. 

“My dears! Which of you left his seat first? Which?” 

“Dunno,” said Ron, looking uneasily at Harry. 

“I doubt it will make much difference,” said Professor 
McGonagall coldly, “unless a mad axe-man is waiting 
outside the doors to slaughter the first into the 
entrance hall.” 



Page | 255 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Even Ron laughed. Professor Trelawney looked highly 
affronted. 

“Coming?” Harry said to Hermione. 

“No,” Hermione muttered, “I want a quick word with 
Professor McGonagall.” 

“Probably trying to see if she can take any more 
classes,” yawned Ron as they made their way into the 
entrance hall, which was completely devoid of mad 
axe-men. 

When they reached the portrait hole, they found Sir 
Cadogan enjoying a Christmas party with a couple of 
monks, several previous headmasters of Hogwarts, 
and his fat pony. He pushed up his visor and toasted 
them with a flagon of mead. 

“Merry — hie — Christmas! Password?” 

“Scurvy cur,” said Ron. 

“And the same to you, sir!” roared Sir Cadogan as the 
painting swung forward to admit them. 

Harry went straight up to the dormitory, collected the 
Firebolt and the Broomstick Servicing Kit Hermione 
had given him for his birthday, brought them 
downstairs, and tried to find something to do to the 
Firebolt; however, there were no bent twigs to clip, 
and the handle was so shiny already it seemed 
pointless to polish it. He and Ron simply sat admiring 
it from every angle until the portrait hole opened, and 
Hermione came in, accompanied by Professor 
McGonagall. 

Though Professor McGonagall was head of Gryffindor 
House, Harry had seen her in the common room only 

Page | 256 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




once before, and that had been to make a very grave 
announcement. He and Ron stared at her, both 
holding the Firebolt. Hermione walked around them, 
sat down, picked up the nearest book, and hid her 
face behind it. 

“So that’s it, is it?” said Professor McGonagall beadily, 
walking over to the fireside and staring at the 
Firebolt. “Miss Granger has just informed me that you 
have been sent a broomstick, Potter.” 

Harry and Ron looked around at Hermione. They 
could see her forehead reddening over the top of her 
book, which was upside down. 

“May I?” said Professor McGonagall, but she didn’t 
wait for an answer before pulling the Firebolt out of 
their hands. She examined it carefully from handle to 
twig-ends. “Hmm. And there was no note at all, 

Potter? No card? No message of any kind?” 

“No,” said Harry blankly. 

“I see ... ,” said Professor McGonagall. “Well, I’m 
afraid I will have to take this, Potter.” 

“W — what?” said Harry, scrambling to his feet. 
“Why?” 

“It will need to be checked for jinxes,” said Professor 
McGonagall. “Of course, I’m no expert, but I daresay 
Madam Hooch and Professor Flitwick will strip it 
down — ” 

“Strip it down?” repeated Ron, as though Professor 
McGonagall was mad. 



Page | 257 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It shouldn’t take more than a few weeks,” said 
Professor McGonagall. “You will have it back if we are 
sure it is jinx-free.” 

“There’s nothing wrong with it!” said Harry, his voice 
shaking slightly. “Honestly, Professor — ” 

“You can’t know that, Potter,” said Professor 
McGonagall, quite kindly, “not until you’ve flown it, at 
any rate, and I’m afraid that is out of the question 
until we are certain that it has not been tampered 
with. I shall keep you informed.” 

Professor McGonagall turned on her heel and carried 
the Firebolt out of the portrait hole, which closed 
behind her. Harry stood staring after her, the tin of 
High-Finish Polish still clutched in his hands. Ron, 
however, rounded on Hermione. 

“What did you go running to McGonagall for?” 

Hermione threw her book aside. She was still pink in 
the face, but stood up and faced Ron defiantly. 

“Because I thought — and Professor McGonagall 
agrees with me — that that broom was probably sent 
to Harry by Sirius Black!” 



Page | 258 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 





THE PATRONUS 

Harry knew that Hermione had meant well, but that 
didn’t stop him from being angry with her. He had 
been the owner of the best broom in the world for a 
few short hours, and now, because of her 
interference, he didn’t know whether he would ever 
see it again. He was positive that there was nothing 
wrong with the Firebolt now, but what sort of state 
would it be in once it had been subjected to all sorts 
of anti-jinx tests? 

Ron was furious with Hermione too. As far as he was 
concerned, the stripping-down of a brand-new 
Firebolt was nothing less than criminal damage. 
Hermione, who remained convinced that she had 
acted for the best, started avoiding the common room. 
Harry and Ron supposed she had taken refuge in the 
library and didn’t try to persuade her to come back. 
All in all, they were glad when the rest of the school 
returned shortly after New Year, and Gryffindor Tower 
became crowded and noisy again. 



Page | 259 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



Wood sought Harry out on the night before term 
started. 



“Had a good Christmas?” he said, and then, without 
waiting for an answer, he sat down, lowered his voice, 
and said, “I’ve been doing some thinking over 
Christmas, Harry. After the last match, you know. If 
the dementors come to the next one ... I mean . . . we 
can’t afford you to — well — ” 

Wood broke off, looking awkward. 

“I’m working on it,” said Harry quickly. “Professor 
Lupin said he’d train me to ward off the dementors. 
We should be starting this week. He said he’d have 
time after Christmas.” 

“Ah,” said Wood, his expression clearing. “Well, in 
that case — I really didn’t want to lose you as Seeker, 
Harry. And have you ordered a new broom yet?” 

“No,” said Harry. 

“What! You’d better get a move on, you know — you 
can’t ride that Shooting Star against Ravenclaw!” 

“He got a Firebolt for Christmas,” said Ron. 

“A Firebolt? No! Seriously? A — a real Firebolt?” 

“Don’t get excited, Oliver,” said Harry gloomily. “I 
haven’t got it anymore. It was confiscated.” And he 
explained all about how the Firebolt was now being 
checked for jinxes. 

“Jinxed? How could it be jinxed?” 



Page | 260 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Sirius Black,” Harry said wearily. “He’s supposed to 
be after me. So McGonagall reckons he might have 
sent it.” 

Waving aside the information that a famous murderer 
was after his Seeker, Wood said, “But Black couldn’t 
have bought a Firebolt! He’s on the run! The whole 
country’s on the lookout for him! How could he just 
walk into Quality Quidditch Supplies and buy a 
broomstick?” 

“I know,” said Harry, “but McGonagall still wants to 
strip it down — ” 

Wood went pale. 

“I’ll go and talk to her, Harry,” he promised. “I’ll make 
her see reason. ... A Firebolt ... a real Firebolt, on our 
team . . . She wants Gryffindor to win as much as we 
do. ... I’ll make her see sense. A Firebolt ...” 

Classes started again the next day. The last thing 
anyone felt like doing was spending two hours on the 
grounds on a raw January morning, but Hagrid had 
provided a bonfire full of salamanders for their 
enjoyment, and they spent an unusually good lesson 
collecting dry wood and leaves to keep the fire blazing 
while the flame-loving lizards scampered up and 
down the crumbling, white-hot logs. The first 
Divination lesson of the new term was much less fun; 
Professor Trelawney was now teaching them 
palmistry, and she lost no time in informing Harry 
that he had the shortest life line she had ever seen. 

It was Defense Against the Dark Arts that Harry was 
keen to get to; after his conversation with Wood, he 
wanted to get started on his anti-dementor lessons as 
soon as possible. 



Page | 261 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ah yes,” said Lupin, when Harry reminded him of his 
promise at the end of class. “Let me see ... how about 
eight o’clock on Thursday evening? The History of 
Magic classroom should be large enough. ... I’ll have 
to think carefully about how we’re going to do this. ... 
We can’t bring a real dementor into the castle to 
practice on. ...” 

“Still looks ill, doesn’t he?” said Ron as they walked 
down the corridor, heading to dinner. “What d’you 
reckon ’s the matter with him?” 

There was a loud and impatient “tuh” from behind 
them. It was Hermione, who had been sitting at the 
feet of a suit of armor, repacking her bag, which was 
so full of books it wouldn’t close. 

“And what are you tutting at us for?” said Ron 
irritably. 

“Nothing,” said Hermione in a lofty voice, heaving her 
bag back over her shoulder. 

“Yes, you were,” said Ron. “I said I wonder what’s 
wrong with Lupin, and you — ” 

“Well, isn’t it obvious?” said Hermione, with a look of 
maddening superiority. 

“If you don’t want to tell us, don’t,” snapped Ron. 

“Fine,” said Hermione haughtily, and she marched off. 

“She doesn’t know,” said Ron, staring resentfully after 
Hermione. “She’s just trying to get us to talk to her 
again.” 

At eight o’clock on Thursday evening, Harry left 
Gryffindor Tower for the History of Magic classroom. 

Page | 262 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




It was dark and empty when he arrived, but he lit the 
lamps with his wand and had waited only five 
minutes when Professor Lupin turned up, carrying a 
large packing case, which he heaved onto Professor 
Binns’ desk. 

“What’s that?” said Harry. 

“Another boggart,” said Lupin, stripping off his cloak. 
“I’ve been combing the castle ever since Tuesday, and 
very luckily, I found this one lurking inside Mr. Filch’s 
filing cabinet. It’s the nearest we’ll get to a real 
dementor. The boggart will turn into a dementor when 
he sees you, so we’ll be able to practice on him. I can 
store him in my office when we’re not using him; 
there’s a cupboard under my desk he’ll like.” 

“Okay,” said Harry, trying to sound as though he 
wasn’t apprehensive at all and merely glad that Lupin 
had found such a good substitute for a real dementor. 

“So ...” Professor Lupin had taken out his own wand, 
and indicated that Harry should do the same. “The 
spell I am going to try and teach you is highly 
advanced magic, Harry — well beyond Ordinary 
Wizarding Level. It is called the Patronus Charm.” 

“How does it work?” said Harry nervously. 

“Well, when it works correctly, it conjures up a 
Patronus,” said Lupin, “which is a kind of anti- 
dementor — a guardian that acts as a shield between 
you and the dementor.” 

Harry had a sudden vision of himself crouching 
behind a Hagrid-sized figure holding a large club. 
Professor Lupin continued, “The Patronus is a kind of 
positive force, a projection of the very things that the 
dementor feeds upon — hope, happiness, the desire 
Page | 263 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




to survive — but it cannot feel despair, as real 
humans can, so the dementors can’t hurt it. But I 
must warn you, Harry, that the charm might be too 
advanced for you. Many qualified wizards have 
difficulty with it.” 

“What does a Patronus look like?” said Harry 
curiously. 

“Each one is unique to the wizard who conjures it.” 
“And how do you conjure it?” 

“With an incantation, which will work only if you are 
concentrating, with all your might, on a single, very 
happy memory.” 

Harry cast his mind about for a happy memory. 
Certainly, nothing that had happened to him at the 
Dursleys’ was going to do. Finally, he settled on the 
moment when he had first ridden a broomstick. 

“Right,” he said, trying to recall as exactly as possible 
the wonderful, soaring sensation of his stomach. 

“The incantation is this — ” Lupin cleared his throat. 
“Expecto patronum).” 

“Expecto patronum,” Harry repeated under his breath, 
“expecto patronum.” 

“Concentrating hard on your happy memory?” 

“Oh — yeah — ” said Harry, quickly forcing his 
thoughts back to that first broom ride. “Expecto 
patrono — no, patronum — sorry — expecto patronum, 
expecto patronum — ” 



Page | 264 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Something whooshed suddenly out of the end of his 
wand; it looked like a wisp of silvery gas. 



“Did you see that?” said Harry excitedly. “Something 
happened!” 

“Very good,” said Lupin, smiling. “Right, then — ready 
to try it on a dementor?” 

“Yes,” Harry said, gripping his wand very tightly, and 
moving into the middle of the deserted classroom. He 
tried to keep his mind on flying, but something else 
kept intruding. . . . Any second now, he might hear his 
mother again . . . but he shouldn’t think that, or he 
would hear her again, and he didn’t want to ... or did 
he? 

Lupin grasped the lid of the packing case and pulled. 

A dementor rose slowly from the box, its hooded face 
turned toward Harry, one glistening, scabbed hand 
gripping its cloak. The lamps around the classroom 
flickered and went out. The dementor stepped from 
the box and started to sweep silently toward Harry, 
drawing a deep, rattling breath. A wave of piercing 
cold broke over him — 

“Expecto patronurrd” Harry yelled. “Expecto patronum). 
Expecto — ” 

But the classroom and the dementor were dissolving. 

. . . Harry was falling again through thick white fog, 
and his mother’s voice was louder than ever, echoing 
inside his head — “ Not Harry\ Not Harry\ Please — I’ll 
do anything — ” 

“Stand aside. Stand aside, girl\” 

“Harry!” 

Page | 265 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry jerked back to life. He was lying flat on his back 
on the floor. The classroom lamps were alight again. 
He didn’t have to ask what had happened. 

“Sorry,” he muttered, sitting up and feeling cold sweat 
trickling down behind his glasses. 

“Are you all right?” said Lupin. 

“Yes ...” Harry pulled himself up on one of the desks 
and leaned against it. 

“Here — ” Lupin handed him a Chocolate Frog. “Eat 
this before we try again. I didn’t expect you to do it 
your first time; in fact, I would have been astounded if 
you had.” 

“It’s getting worse,” Harry muttered, biting off the 
Frog’s head. “I could hear her louder that time — and 
him — Voldemort — ” 

Lupin looked paler than usual. 

“Harry, if you don’t want to continue, I will more than 
understand — ” 

“I do!” said Harry fiercely, stuffing the rest of the 
Chocolate Frog into his mouth. “I’ve got to! What if 
the dementors turn up at our match against 
Ravenclaw? I can’t afford to fall off again. If we lose 
this game we’ve lost the Quidditch Cup!” 

“All right then ... ,” said Lupin. “You might want to 
select another memory, a happy memory, I mean, to 
concentrate on. ... That one doesn’t seem to have 
been strong enough. ...” 

Harry thought hard and decided his feelings when 
Gryffindor had won the House Championship last 

Page | 266 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




year had definitely qualified as very happy. He 
gripped his wand tightly again and took up his 
position in the middle of the classroom. 

“Ready?” said Lupin, gripping the box lid. 

“Ready,” said Harry, trying hard to fill his head with 
happy thoughts about Gryffindor winning, and not 
dark thoughts about what was going to happen when 
the box opened. 

“Go!” said Lupin, pulling off the lid. The room went 
icily cold and dark once more. The dementor glided 
forward, drawing its breath; one rotting hand was 
extending toward Harry — 

“Expecto patronum).” Harry yelled. “Expecto patronuml 
Expecto pat — ” 

White fog obscured his senses . . . big, blurred shapes 
were moving around him ... then came a new voice, a 
man’s voice, shouting, panicking — 

“Lily, take Harry and go\ It’s him\ Go! Run\ I’ll hold him 

off~ 

The sounds of someone stumbling from a room — a 
door bursting open — a cackle of high-pitched 
laughter — 

“Harry! Harry ... wake up. ...” 

Lupin was tapping Harry hard on the face. This time 
it was a minute before Harry understood why he was 
lying on a dusty classroom floor. 

“I heard my dad,” Harry mumbled. “That’s the first 
time I’ve ever heard him — he tried to take on 



Page | 267 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Voldemort himself, to give my mum time to run for it. 



Harry suddenly realized that there were tears on his 
face mingling with the sweat. He bent his face as low 
as possible, wiping them off on his robes, pretending 
to do up his shoelace, so that Lupin wouldn’t see. 

“You heard James?” said Lupin in a strange voice. 

“Yeah ...” Face dry, Harry looked up. “Why — you 
didn’t know my dad, did you?” 

“I — I did, as a matter of fact,” said Lupin. “We were 
friends at Hogwarts. Listen, Harry — perhaps we 
should leave it here for tonight. This charm is 
ridiculously advanced. ... I shouldn’t have suggested 
putting you through this. ...” 

“No!” said Harry. He got up again. “I’ll have one more 
go! I’m not thinking of happy enough things, that’s 
what it is. ... Hang on. ...” 

He racked his brains. A really, really happy memory 
. . . one that he could turn into a good, strong 
Patronus ... 

The moment when he’d first found out he was a 
wizard, and would be leaving the Dursleys for 
Hogwarts! If that wasn’t a happy memory, he didn’t 
know what was. ... Concentrating very hard on how 
he had felt when he’d realized he’d be leaving Privet 
Drive, Harry got to his feet and faced the packing case 
once more. 

“Ready?” said Lupin, who looked as though he were 
doing this against his better judgment. 

“Concentrating hard? All right — go!” 



Page | 268 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He pulled off the lid of the case for the third time, and 
the dementor rose out of it; the room fell cold and 
dark — 

“EXPECTO PATRONUM ” Harry bellowed. “ EXPECTO 
PATRONUM EXPECTO PATRONUM ” 

The screaming inside Harry’s head had started again 
— except this time, it sounded as though it were 
coming from a badly tuned radio — softer and louder 
and softer again — and he could still see the 
dementor — it had halted — and then a huge, silver 
shadow came bursting out of the end of Harry’s wand, 
to hover between him and the dementor, and though 
Harry’s legs felt like water, he was still on his feet — 
though for how much longer, he wasn’t sure — 

“ RiddikulusV’ roared Lupin, springing forward. 

There was a loud crack, and Harry’s cloudy Patronus 
vanished along with the dementor; he sank into a 
chair, feeling as exhausted as if he’d just run a mile, 
and felt his legs shaking. Out of the corner of his eye, 
he saw Professor Lupin forcing the boggart back into 
the packing case with his wand; it had turned into a 
silvery orb again. 

“Excellent!” Lupin said, striding over to where Harry 
sat. “Excellent, Harry! That was definitely a start!” 

“Can we have another go? Just one more go?” 

“Not now,” said Lupin firmly. “You’ve had enough for 
one night. Here — ” 

He handed Harry a large bar of Honeydukes’ best 
chocolate. 



Page | 269 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Eat the lot, or Madam Pomfrey will be after my blood. 
Same time next week?” 

“Okay,” said Harry. He took a bite of the chocolate 
and watched Lupin extinguishing the lamps that had 
rekindled with the disappearance of the dementor. A 
thought had just occurred to him. 

“Professor Lupin?” he said. “If you knew my dad, you 
must’ve known Sirius Black as well.” 

Lupin turned very quickly. 

“What gives you that idea?” he said sharply. 

“Nothing — I mean, I just knew they were friends at 
Hogwarts too. ...” 

Lupin’s face relaxed. 

“Yes, I knew him,” he said shortly. “Or I thought I did. 
You’d better be off, Harry, it’s getting late.” 

Harry left the classroom, walking along the corridor 
and around a corner, then took a detour behind a 
suit of armor and sank down on its plinth to finish 
his chocolate, wishing he hadn’t mentioned Black, as 
Lupin was obviously not keen on the subject. Then 
Harry’s thoughts wandered back to his mother and 
father. ... 

He felt drained and strangely empty, even though he 
was so full of chocolate. Terrible though it was to hear 
his parents’ last moments replayed inside his head, 
these were the only times Harry had heard their 
voices since he was a very small child. But he’d never 
be able to produce a proper Patronus if he half 
wanted to hear his parents again. ... 



Page | 270 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“They’re dead,” he told himself sternly. “They’re dead 
and listening to echoes of them won’t bring them 
back. You’d better get a grip on yourself if you want 
that Quidditch Cup.” 

He stood up, crammed the last bit of chocolate into 
his mouth, and headed back to Gryffindor Tower. 

Ravenclaw played Slytherin a week after the start of 
term. Slytherin won, though narrowly. According to 
Wood, this was good news for Gryffindor, who would 
take second place if they beat Ravenclaw too. He 
therefore increased the number of team practices to 
five a week. This meant that with Lupin’s anti- 
dementor classes, which in themselves were more 
draining than six Quidditch practices, Harry had just 
one night a week to do all his homework. Even so, he 
wasn’t showing the strain nearly as much as 
Hermione, whose immense workload finally seemed to 
be getting to her. Every night, without fail, Hermione 
was to be seen in a corner of the common room, 
several tables spread with books, Arithmancy charts, 
rune dictionaries, diagrams of Muggles lifting heavy 
objects, and file upon file of extensive notes; she 
barely spoke to anybody and snapped when she was 
interrupted. 

“How’s she doing it?” Ron muttered to Harry one 
evening as Harry sat finishing a nasty essay on 
Undetectable Poisons for Snape. Harry looked up. 
Hermione was barely visible behind a tottering pile of 
books. 

“Doing what?” 

“Getting to all her classes!” Ron said. “I heard her 
talking to Professor Vector, that Arithmancy witch, 
this morning. They were going on about yesterday’s 
lesson, but Hermione can’t’ve been there, because she 

Page | 271 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




was with us in Care of Magical Creatures! And Ernie 
McMillan told me she’s never missed a Muggle 
Studies class, but half of them are at the same time 
as Divination, and she’s never missed one of them 
either!” 

Harry didn’t have time to fathom the mystery of 
Hermione’s impossible schedule at the moment; he 
really needed to get on with Snape’s essay. Two 
seconds later, however, he was interrupted again, this 
time by Wood. 

“Bad news, Harry. I’ve just been to see Professor 
McGonagall about the Firebolt. She — er — got a bit 
shirty with me. Told me I’d got my priorities wrong. 
Seemed to think I cared more about winning the Cup 
than I do about you staying alive. Just because I told 
her I didn’t care if it threw you off, as long as you 
caught the Snitch first.” Wood shook his head in 
disbelief. “Honestly, the way she was yelling at me . . . 
you’d think I’d said something terrible. ... Then I 
asked her how much longer she was going to keep it. 
...” He screwed up his face and imitated Professor 
McGonagall’s severe voice. “ ‘As long as necessary, 
Wood’ ... I reckon it’s time you ordered a new broom, 
Harry. There’s an order form at the back of Which 
Broomstick ... you could get a Nimbus Two Thousand 
and One, like Malfoy’s got.” 

“I’m not buying anything Malfoy thinks is good,” said 
Harry flatly. 

January faded imperceptibly into February, with no 
change in the bitterly cold weather. The match 
against Ravenclaw was drawing nearer and nearer, 
but Harry still hadn’t ordered a new broom. He was 
now asking Professor McGonagall for news of the 
Firebolt after every Transfiguration lesson, Ron 



Page | 272 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




standing hopefully at his shoulder, Hermione rushing 
past with her face averted. 

“No, Potter, you can’t have it back yet,” Professor 
McGonagall told him the twelfth time this happened, 
before he’d even opened his mouth. “We’ve checked 
for most of the usual curses, but Professor Flitwick 
believes the broom might be carrying a Hurling Hex. I 
shall tell you once we’ve finished checking it. Now, 
please stop badgering me.” 

To make matters even worse, Harry’s anti-dementor 
lessons were not going nearly as well as he had 
hoped. Several sessions on, he was able to produce 
an indistinct, silvery shadow every time the boggart- 
dementor approached him, but his Patronus was too 
feeble to drive the dementor away. All it did was 
hover, like a semi-transparent cloud, draining Harry 
of energy as he fought to keep it there. Harry felt 
angry with himself, guilty about his secret desire to 
hear his parents’ voices again. 

“You’re expecting too much of yourself,” said 
Professor Lupin sternly in their fourth week of 
practice. “For a thirteen-year-old wizard, even an 
indistinct Patronus is a huge achievement. You aren’t 
passing out anymore, are you?” 

“I thought a Patronus would — charge the dementors 
down or something,” said Harry dispiritedly. “Make 
them disappear — ” 

“The true Patronus does do that,” said Lupin. “But 
you’ve achieved a great deal in a very short space of 
time. If the dementors put in an appearance at your 
next Quidditch match, you will be able to keep them 
at bay long enough to get back to the ground.” 



Page | 273 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You said it’s harder if there are loads of them,” said 
Harry. 

“I have complete confidence in you,” said Lupin, 
smiling. “Here — you’ve earned a drink — something 
from the Three Broomsticks. You won’t have tried it 
before — ” 

He pulled two bottles out of his briefcase. 

“Butterbeer!” said Harry, without thinking. “Yeah, I 
like that stuff!” 

Lupin raised an eyebrow. 

“Oh — Ron and Hermione brought me some back 
from Hogsmeade,” Harry lied quickly. 

“I see,” said Lupin, though he still looked slightly 
suspicious. “Well — let’s drink to a Gryffindor victory 
against Ravenclaw! Not that I’m supposed to take 
sides, as a teacher ... ,” he added hastily. 

They drank the butterbeer in silence, until Harry 
voiced something he’d been wondering for a while. 

“What’s under a dementor’s hood?” 

Professor Lupin lowered his bottle thoughtfully. 

“Hmmm ... well, the only people who really know are 
in no condition to tell us. You see, the dementor 
lowers its hood only to use its last and worst 
weapon.” 

“What’s that?” 

“They call it the Dementor’s Kiss,” said Lupin, with a 
slightly twisted smile. “It’s what dementors do to 

Page | 274 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




those they wish to destroy utterly. I suppose there 
must be some kind of mouth under there, because 
they clamp their jaws upon the mouth of the victim 
and — and suck out his soul.” 

Harry accidentally spat out a bit of butterbeer. 

“What — they kill — ?” 

“Oh no,” said Lupin. “Much worse than that. You can 
exist without your soul, you know, as long as your 
brain and heart are still working. But you 11 have no 
sense of self anymore, no memory, no ... anything. 
There’s no chance at all of recovery. You’ll just — 
exist. As an empty shell. And your soul is gone forever 
... lost.” 

Lupin drank a little more butterbeer, then said, “It’s 
the fate that awaits Sirius Black. It was in the Daily 
Prophet this morning. The Ministry have given the 
dementors permission to perform it if they find him.” 

Harry sat stunned for a moment at the idea of 
someone having their soul sucked out through their 
mouth. But then he thought of Black. 

“He deserves it,” he said suddenly. 

“You think so?” said Lupin lightly. “Do you really 
think anyone deserves that?” 

“Yes,” said Harry defiantly. “For ... for some things ...” 

He would have liked to have told Lupin about the 
conversation he’d overheard about Black in the Three 
Broomsticks, about Black betraying his mother and 
father, but it would have involved revealing that he’d 
gone to Hogsmeade without permission, and he knew 
Lupin wouldn’t be very impressed by that. So he 
Page | 275 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




finished his butterbeer, thanked Lupin, and left the 
History of Magic classroom. 

Harry half wished that he hadn’t asked what was 
under a dementor’s hood, the answer had been so 
horrible, and he was so lost in unpleasant thoughts of 
what it would feel like to have your soul sucked out of 
you that he walked headlong into Professor 
McGonagall halfway up the stairs. 

“Do watch where you’re going, Potter!” 

“Sorry, Professor — ” 

“I’ve just been looking for you in the Gryffindor 
common room. Well, here it is, we’ve done everything 
we could think of, and there doesn’t seem to be 
anything wrong with it at all. You’ve got a very good 
friend somewhere, Potter. ...” 

Harry’s jaw dropped. She was holding out his 
Firebolt, and it looked as magnificent as ever. 

“I can have it back?” Harry said weakly. “Seriously?” 

“Seriously,” said Professor McGonagall, and she was 
actually smiling. “I daresay you’ll need to get the feel 
of it before Saturday’s match, won’t you? And Potter 
— do try and win, won’t you? Or we’ll be out of the 
running for the eighth year in a row, as Professor 
Snape was kind enough to remind me only last night. 



Speechless, Harry carried the Firebolt back upstairs 
toward Gryffindor Tower. As he turned a corner, he 
saw Ron dashing toward him, grinning from ear to 
ear. 



Page | 276 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“She gave it to you? Excellent! Listen, can I still have 
a go on it? Tomorrow?” 

“Yeah ... anything ... said Harry, his heart lighter 
than it had been in a month. “You know what — we 
should make up with Hermione. ... She was only 
trying to help. ...” 

“Yeah, all right,” said Ron. “She’s in the common 
room now — working, for a change — ” 

They turned into the corridor to Gryffindor Tower and 
saw Neville Longbottom, pleading with Sir Cadogan, 
who seemed to be refusing him entrance. 

“I wrote them down!” Neville was saying tearfully. 

“But I must’ve dropped them somewhere!” 

“A likely tale!” roared Sir Cadogan. Then, spotting 
Harry and Ron: “Good even, my fine young yeomen! 
Come clap this loon in irons. He is trying to force 
entry to the chambers within!” 

“Oh, shut up,” said Ron as he and Harry drew level 
with Neville. 

“I’ve lost the passwords!” Neville told them miserably. 
“I made him tell me what passwords he was going to 
use this week, because he keeps changing them, and 
now I don’t know what I’ve done with them!” 

“Oddsbodikins,” said Harry to Sir Cadogan, who 
looked extremely disappointed and reluctantly swung 
forward to let them into the common room. There was 
a sudden, excited murmur as every head turned and 
the next moment, Harry was surrounded by people 
exclaiming over his Firebolt. 

“Where ’d you get it, Harry?” 

Page | 277 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Will you let me have a go?” 

“Have you ridden it yet, Harry?” 

“Ravenclaw’ll have no chance, they’re all on 
Cleansweep Sevens!” 

“Can I just hold it, Harry?” 

After ten minutes or so, during which the Firebolt was 
passed around and admired from every angle, the 
crowd dispersed and Harry and Ron had a clear view 
of Hermione, the only person who hadn’t rushed over 
to them, bent over her work and carefully avoiding 
their eyes. Harry and Ron approached her table and 
at last, she looked up. 

“I got it back,” said Harry, grinning at her and holding 
up the Firebolt. 

“See, Hermione? There wasn’t anything wrong with 
it!” said Ron. 

“Well — there might have been!” said Hermione. “I 
mean, at least you know now that it’s safe!” 

“Yeah, I suppose so,” said Harry. “I’d better put it 
upstairs — ” 

“I’ll take it!” said Ron eagerly. “I’ve got to give 
Scabbers his rat tonic.” 

He took the Firebolt and, holding it as if it were made 
of glass, carried it away up the boys’ staircase. 

“Can I sit down, then?” Harry asked Hermione. 

“I suppose so,” said Hermione, moving a great stack 
of parchment off a chair. 

Page | 278 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry looked around at the cluttered table, at the 
long Arithmancy essay on which the ink was still 
glistening, at the even longer Muggle Studies essay 
(“Explain Why Muggles Need Electricity”) and at the 
rune translation Hermione was now poring over. 

“How are you getting through all this stuff?” Harry 
asked her. 

“Oh, well — you know — working hard,” said 
Hermione. Close-up, Harry saw that she looked 
almost as tired as Lupin. 

“Why don’t you just drop a couple of subjects?” Harry 
asked, watching her lifting books as she searched for 
her rune dictionary. 

“I couldn’t do that!” said Hermione, looking 
scandalized. 

“Arithmancy looks terrible,” said Harry, picking up a 
very complicated-looking number chart. 

“Oh no, it’s wonderful!” said Hermione earnestly. “It’s 
my favorite subject! It’s — ” 

But exactly what was wonderful about Arithmancy, 
Harry never found out. At that precise moment, a 
strangled yell echoed down the boys’ staircase. The 
whole common room fell silent, staring, petrified, at 
the entrance. Then came hurried footsteps, growing 
louder and louder — and then Ron came leaping into 
view, dragging with him a bedsheet. 

“LOOK!” he bellowed, striding over to Hermione’s 
table. “LOOK!” he yelled, shaking the sheets in her 
face. 

“Ron, what — ?” 

Page | 279 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“SCABBERS! LOOK! SCABBERS!” 



Hermione was leaning away from Ron, looking utterly 
bewildered. Harry looked down at the sheet Ron was 
holding. There was something red on it. Something 
that looked horribly like — 

“BLOOD!” Ron yelled into the stunned silence. “HE’S 
GONE! AND YOU KNOW WHAT WAS ON THE 
FLOOR?” 

“N — no,” said Hermione in a trembling voice. 

Ron threw something down onto Hermione ’s rune 
translation. Hermione and Harry leaned forward. 
Lying on top of the weird, spiky shapes were several 
long, ginger cat hairs. 



Page | 280 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






GRYFFINDOR VERSUS RAVENCLAW 

It looked like the end of Ron and Hermione’s 
friendship. Each was so angry with the other that 
Harry couldn’t see how they’d ever make up. 

Ron was enraged that Hermione had never taken 
Crookshanks’s attempts to eat Scabbers seriously, 
hadn’t bothered to keep a close enough watch on him, 
and was still trying to pretend that Crookshanks was 
innocent by suggesting that Ron look for Scabbers 
under all the boys’ beds. Hermione, meanwhile, 
maintained fiercely that Ron had no proof that 
Crookshanks had eaten Scabbers, that the ginger 
hairs might have been there since Christmas, and 
that Ron had been prejudiced against her cat ever 
since Crookshanks had landed on Ron’s head in the 
Magical Menagerie. 

Personally, Harry was sure that Crookshanks had 
eaten Scabbers, and when he tried to point out to 
Hermione that the evidence all pointed that way, she 
lost her temper with Harry too. 



Page | 281 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



“Okay, side with Ron, I knew you would!” she said 
shrilly. “First the Firebolt, now Scabbers, everything’s 
my fault, isn’t it! Just leave me alone, Harry, I’ve got a 
lot of work to do!” 

Ron had taken the loss of his rat very hard indeed. 

“Come on, Ron, you were always saying how boring 
Scabbers was,” said Fred bracingly “And he’s been 
off-color for ages, he was wasting away. It was 
probably better for him to snuff it quickly — one 
swallow — he probably didn’t feel a thing.” 

“Fred\” said Ginny indignantly. 

“All he did was eat and sleep, Ron, you said it 
yourself,” said George. 

“He bit Goyle for us once!” Ron said miserably. 
“Remember, Harry?” 

“Yeah, that’s true,” said Harry. 

“His finest hour,” said Fred, unable to keep a straight 
face. “Let the scar on Goyle ’s finger stand as a lasting 
tribute to his memory. Oh, come on, Ron, get yourself 
down to Hogsmeade and buy a new rat, what’s the 
point of moaning?” 

In a last-ditch attempt to cheer Ron up, Harry 
persuaded him to come along to the Gryffindor team’s 
final practice before the Ravenclaw match, so that he 
could have a ride on the Firebolt after they’d finished. 
This did seem to take Ron’s mind off Scabbers for a 
moment (“Great! Can I try and shoot a few goals on 
it?”) so they set off for the Quidditch field together. 

Madam Hooch, who was still overseeing Gryffindor 
practices to keep an eye on Harry, was just as 

Page | 282 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




impressed with the Firebolt as everyone else had 
been. She took it in her hands before takeoff and gave 
them the benefit of her professional opinion. 

“Look at the balance on it! If the Nimbus series has a 
fault, it’s a slight list to the tail end — you often find 
they develop a drag after a few years. They’ve updated 
the handle too, a bit slimmer than the Cleansweeps, 
reminds me of the old Silver Arrows — a pity they’ve 
stopped making them. I learned to fly on one, and a 
very fine old broom it was too. ...” 

She continued in this vein for some time, until Wood 
said, “Er — Madam Hooch? Is it okay if Harry has the 
Firebolt back? We need to practice. ...” 

“Oh — right — here you are, then, Potter,” said 
Madam Hooch. “I’ll sit over here with Weasley ...” 

She and Ron left the field to sit in the stadium, and 
the Gryffindor team gathered around Wood for his 
final instructions for tomorrow’s match. 

“Harry, I’ve just found out who Ravenclaw is playing 
as Seeker. It’s Cho Chang. She’s a fourth year, and 
she’s pretty good. ... I really hoped she wouldn’t be fit, 
she’s had some problems with injuries. ...” Wood 
scowled his displeasure that Cho Chang had made a 
full recovery, then said, “On the other hand, she rides 
a Comet Two Sixty, which is going to look like a joke 
next to the Firebolt.” He gave Harry’s broom a look of 
fervent admiration, then said, “Okay, everyone, let’s 
go 



And at long last, Harry mounted his Firebolt, and 
kicked off from the ground. 

It was better than he’d ever dreamed. The Firebolt 
turned with the lightest touch; it seemed to obey his 

Page | 283 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




thoughts rather than his grip; it sped across the field 
at such speed that the stadium turned into a green- 
and-gray blur; Harry turned it so sharply that Alicia 
Spinnet screamed, then he went into a perfectly 
controlled dive, brushing the grassy field with his toes 
before rising thirty, forty, fifty feet into the air again — 

“Harry, I’m letting the Snitch out!” Wood called. 

Harry turned and raced a Bludger toward the goal 
posts; he outstripped it easily, saw the Snitch dart 
out from behind Wood, and within ten seconds had 
caught it tightly in his hand. 

The team cheered madly. Harry let the Snitch go 
again, gave it a minute’s head start, then tore after it, 
weaving in and out of the others; he spotted it lurking 
near Katie Bell’s knee, looped her easily, and caught 
it again. 

It was the best practice ever; the team, inspired by 
the presence of the Firebolt in their midst, performed 
their best moves faultlessly, and by the time they hit 
the ground again, Wood didn’t have a single criticism 
to make, which, as George Weasley pointed out, was a 
first. 

“I can’t see what’s going to stop us tomorrow!” said 
Wood. “Not unless — Harry, you’ve sorted out your 
dementor problem, haven’t you?” 

“Yeah,” said Harry, thinking of his feeble Patronus 
and wishing it were stronger. 

“The dementors won’t turn up again, Oliver. 
Dumbledore’d go ballistic,” said Fred confidently. 



Page | 284 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Well, let’s hope not,” said Wood. “Anyway — good 
work, everyone. Let’s get back to the tower ... turn in 
early — ” 

“I’m staying out for a bit; Ron wants a go on the 
Firebolt,” Harry told Wood, and while the rest of the 
team headed off to the locker rooms, Harry strode 
over to Ron, who vaulted the barrier to the stands 
and came to meet him. Madam Hooch had fallen 
asleep in her seat. 

“Here you go,” said Harry, handing Ron the Firebolt. 

Ron, an expression of ecstasy on his face, mounted 
the broom and zoomed off into the gathering darkness 
while Harry walked around the edge of the field, 
watching him. Night had fallen before Madam Hooch 
awoke with a start, told Harry and Ron off for not 
waking her, and insisted that they go back to the 
castle. 

Harry shouldered the Firebolt and he and Ron walked 
out of the shadowy stadium, discussing the Firebolt’s 
superbly smooth action, its phenomenal acceleration, 
and its pinpoint turning. They were halfway toward 
the castle when Harry, glancing to his left, saw 
something that made his heart turn over — a pair of 
eyes, gleaming out of the darkness. 

Harry stopped dead, his heart banging against his 
ribs. 

“What’s the matter?” said Ron. 

Harry pointed. Ron pulled out his wand and 
muttered, “Lumos\” 



Page | 285 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




A beam of light fell across the grass, hit the bottom of 
a tree, and illuminated its branches; there, crouching 
among the budding leaves, was Crookshanks. 

“Get out of here!” Ron roared, and he stooped down 
and seized a stone lying on the grass, but before he 
could do anything else, Crookshanks had vanished 
with one swish of his long ginger tail. 

“See?” Ron said furiously, chucking the stone down 
again. “She’s still letting him wander about wherever 
he wants — probably washing down Scabbers with a 
couple of birds now. ...” 

Harry didn’t say anything. He took a deep breath as 
relief seeped through him; he had been sure for a 
moment that those eyes had belonged to the Grim. 
They set off for the castle once more. Slightly 
ashamed of his moment of panic, Harry didn’t say 
anything to Ron — nor did he look left or right until 
they had reached the well-lit entrance hall. 

Harry went down to breakfast the next morning with 
the rest of the boys in his dormitory, all of whom 
seemed to think the Firebolt deserved a sort of guard 
of honor. As Harry entered the Great Hall, heads 
turned in the direction of the Firebolt, and there was 
a good deal of excited muttering. Harry saw, with 
enormous satisfaction, that the Slytherin team were 
all looking thunderstruck. 

“Did you see his face?” said Ron gleefully, looking 
back at Malfoy. “He can’t believe it! This is brilliant!” 

Wood, too, was basking in the reflected glory of the 
Firebolt. 

“Put it here, Harry,” he said, laying the broom in the 
middle of the table and carefully turning it so that its 

Page | 286 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




name faced upward. People from the Ravenclaw and 
Hufflepuff tables were soon coming over to look. 
Cedric Diggory came over to congratulate Harry on 
having acquired such a superb replacement for his 
Nimbus, and Percy’s Ravenclaw girlfriend, Penelope 
Clearwater, asked if she could actually hold the 
Firebolt. 

“Now, now, Penny, no sabotage!” said Percy heartily 
as she examined the Firebolt closely “Penelope and I 
have got a bet on,” he told the team. “Ten Galleons on 
the outcome of the match!” 

Penelope put the Firebolt down again, thanked Harry, 
and went back to her table. 

“Harry — make sure you win,” said Percy, in an 
urgent whisper. “I haven’t got ten Galleons. Yes, I’m 
coming, Penny!” And he bustled off to join her in a 
piece of toast. 

“Sure you can manage that broom, Potter?” said a 
cold, drawling voice. 

Draco Malfoy had arrived for a closer look, Crabbe 
and Goyle right behind him. 

“Yeah, reckon so,” said Harry casually. 

“Got plenty of special features, hasn’t it?” said Malfoy, 
eyes glittering maliciously. “Shame it doesn’t come 
with a parachute — in case you get too near a 
dementor.” 

Crabbe and Goyle sniggered. 

“Pity you can’t attach an extra arm to yours, Malfoy,” 
said Harry. “Then it could catch the Snitch for you.” 



Page | 287 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The Gryffindor team laughed loudly. Malfoy’s pale 
eyes narrowed, and he stalked away. They watched 
him rejoin the rest of the Slytherin team, who put 
their heads together, no doubt asking Malfoy whether 
Harry’s broom really was a Firebolt. 

At a quarter to eleven, the Gryffindor team set off for 
the locker rooms. The weather couldn’t have been 
more different from their match against Hufflepuff. It 
was a clear, cool day with a very light breeze; there 
would be no visibility problems this time, and Harry, 
though nervous, was starting to feel the excitement 
only a Quidditch match could bring. They could hear 
the rest of the school moving into the stadium 
beyond. Harry took off his black school robes, 
removed his wand from his pocket, and stuck it 
inside the T-shirt he was going to wear under his 
Quidditch robes. He only hoped he wouldn’t need it. 
He wondered suddenly whether Professor Lupin was 
in the crowd, watching. 

“You know what we’ve got to do,” said Wood as they 
prepared to leave the locker rooms. “If we lose this 
match, we’re out of the running. Just — just fly like 
you did in practice yesterday, and we’ll be okay!” 

They walked out onto the field to tumultuous 
applause. The Ravenclaw team, dressed in blue, were 
already standing in the middle of the field. Their 
Seeker, Cho Chang, was the only girl on their team. 
She was shorter than Harry by about a head, and 
Harry couldn’t help noticing, nervous as he was, that 
she was extremely pretty. She smiled at Harry as the 
teams faced each other behind their captains, and he 
felt a slight lurch in the region of his stomach that he 
didn’t think had anything to do with nerves. 



Page | 288 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Wood, Davies, shake hands,” Madam Hooch said 
briskly, and Wood shook hands with the Ravenclaw 
Captain. 

“Mount your brooms ... on my whistle . . . three — two 
— one — ” 

Harry kicked off into the air and the Firebolt zoomed 
higher and faster than any other broom; he soared 
around the stadium and began squinting around for 
the Snitch, listening all the while to the commentary, 
which was being provided by the Weasley twins’ 
friend Lee Jordan. 

“They’re off, and the big excitement this match is the 
Firebolt that Harry Potter is flying for Gryffindor. 
According to Which Broomstick, the Firebolt’s going to 
be the broom of choice for the national teams at this 
year’s World Championship — ” 

“Jordan, would you mind telling us what’s going on in 
the match?” interrupted Professor McGonagall’s voice. 

“Right you are, Professor — just giving a bit of 
background information — the Firebolt, incidentally, 
has a built-in auto-brake and — ” 

“Jordan!” 

“Okay, okay, Gryffindor in possession, Katie Bell of 
Gryffindor heading for goal ...” 

Harry streaked past Katie in the opposite direction, 
gazing around for a glint of gold and noticing that Cho 
Chang was tailing him closely. She was undoubtedly 
a very good flier — she kept cutting across him, 
forcing him to change direction. 



Page | 289 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Show her your acceleration, Harry!” Fred yelled as he 
whooshed past in pursuit of a Bludger that was 
aiming for Alicia. 

Harry urged the Firebolt forward as they rounded the 
Ravenclaw goal posts and Cho fell behind. Just as 
Katie succeeded in scoring the first goal of the match, 
and the Gryffindor end of the field went wild, he saw 
it — the Snitch was close to the ground, flitting near 
one of the barriers. 

Harry dived; Cho saw what he was doing and tore 
after him — Harry was speeding up, excitement 
flooding him; dives were his speciality, he was ten feet 
away — 

Then a Bludger, hit by one of the Ravenclaw Beaters, 
came pelting out of nowhere; Harry veered off course, 
avoiding it by an inch, and in those few, crucial 
seconds, the Snitch had vanished. 

There was a great “Ooooooh” of disappointment from 
the Gryffindor supporters, but much applause for 
their Beater from the Ravenclaw end. George Weasley 
vented his feelings by hitting the second Bludger 
directly at the offending Beater, who was forced to roll 
right over in midair to avoid it. 

“Gryffindor leads by eighty points to zero, and look at 
that Firebolt go! Potter’s really putting it through its 
paces now, see it turn — Chang’s Comet is just no 
match for it, the Firebolt’s precision-balance is really 
noticeable in these long — ” 

“JORDAN! ARE YOU BEING PAID TO ADVERTISE 
FIREBOLTS? GET ON WITH THE COMMENTARY!” 

Ravenclaw was pulling back; they had now scored 
three goals, which put Gryffindor only fifty points 

Page | 290 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




ahead — if Cho got the Snitch before him, Ravenclaw 
would win. Harry dropped lower, narrowly avoiding a 
Ravenclaw Chaser, scanning the field frantically — a 
glint of gold, a flutter of tiny wings — the Snitch was 
circling the Gryffindor goal post — 

Harry accelerated, eyes fixed on the speck of gold 
ahead — but just then, Cho appeared out of thin air, 
blocking him — 

“HARRY, THIS IS NO TIME TO BE A GENTLEMAN!” 
Wood roared as Harry swerved to avoid a collision. 
“KNOCK HER OFF HER BROOM IF YOU HAVE TO!” 

Harry turned and caught sight of Cho; she was 
grinning. The Snitch had vanished again. Harry 
turned his Firebolt upward and was soon twenty feet 
above the game. Out of the corner of his eye, he saw 
Cho following him. ... She’d decided to mark him 
rather than search for the Snitch herself. . . . All right, 
then ... if she wanted to tail him, she’d have to take 
the consequences. ... 

He dived again, and Cho, thinking he’d seen the 
Snitch, tried to follow; Harry pulled out of the dive 
very sharply; she hurtled downward; he rose fast as a 
bullet once more, and then saw it, for the third time 
— the Snitch was glittering way above the field at the 
Ravenclaw end. 

He accelerated; so, many feet below, did Cho. He was 
winning, gaining on the Snitch with every second — 
then — 

“Oh!” screamed Cho, pointing. 

Distracted, Harry looked down. 



Page | 291 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Three dementors, three tall, black, hooded dementors, 
were looking up at him. 

He didn’t stop to think. Plunging a hand down the 
neck of his robes, he whipped out his wand and 
roared, “Expecto patronum).” 

Something silver-white, something enormous, erupted 
from the end of his wand. He knew it had shot 
directly at the dementors but didn’t pause to watch; 
his mind still miraculously clear, he looked ahead — 
he was nearly there. He stretched out the hand still 
grasping his wand and just managed to close his 
fingers over the small, struggling Snitch. 

Madam Hooch’s whistle sounded. Harry turned 
around in midair and saw six scarlet blurs bearing 
down on him; next moment, the whole team was 
hugging him so hard he was nearly pulled off his 
broom. Down below he could hear the roars of the 
Gryffindors in the crowd. 

“That’s my boy!” Wood kept yelling. Alicia, Angelina, 
and Katie had all kissed Harry; Fred had him in a grip 
so tight Harry felt as though his head would come off. 
In complete disarray, the team managed to make its 
way back to the ground. Harry got off his broom and 
looked up to see a gaggle of Gryffindor supporters 
sprinting onto the field, Ron in the lead. Before he 
knew it, he had been engulfed by the cheering crowd. 

“Yes!” Ron yelled, yanking Harry’s arm into the air. 
“Yes! Yes!” 

“Well done, Harry!” said Percy, looking delighted. “Ten 
Galleons to me! Must find Penelope, excuse me — ” 

“Good for you, Harry!” roared Seamus Finnigan. 



Page | 292 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ruddy brilliant!” boomed Hagrid over the heads of 
the milling Gryffindors. 

“That was quite some Patronus,” said a voice in 
Harry’s ear. 

Harry turned around to see Professor Lupin, who 
looked both shaken and pleased. 

“The dementors didn’t affect me at all!” Harry said 
excitedly. “I didn’t feel a thing!” 

“That would be because they — er — weren’t 
dementors,” said Professor Lupin. “Come and see — ” 

He led Harry out of the crowd until they were able to 
see the edge of the field. 

“You gave Mr. Malfoy quite a fright,” said Lupin. 

Harry stared. Lying in a crumpled heap on the ground 
were Malfoy, Crabbe, Goyle, and Marcus Flint, the 
Slytherin team Captain, all struggling to remove 
themselves from long, black, hooded robes. It looked 
as though Malfoy had been standing on Goyle ’s 
shoulders. Standing over them, with an expression of 
the utmost fury on her face, was Professor 
McGonagall. 

“An unworthy trick!” she was shouting. “A low and 
cowardly attempt to sabotage the Gryffindor Seeker! 
Detention for all of you, and fifty points from 
Slytherin! I shall be speaking to Professor 
Dumbledore about this, make no mistake! Ah, here 
he comes now!” 

If anything could have set the seal on Gryffindor’s 
victory, it was this. Ron, who had fought his way 
through to Harry’s side, doubled up with laughter as 

Page | 293 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




they watched Malfoy fighting to extricate himself from 
the robe, Goyle’s head still stuck inside it. 



“Come on, Harry!” said George, fighting his way over. 
“Party! Gryffindor common room, now!” 

“Right,” said Harry, and feeling happier than he had 
in ages, he and the rest of the team led the way, still 
in their scarlet robes, out of the stadium and back up 
to the castle. 



It felt as though they had already won the Quidditch 
Cup; the party went on all day and well into the night. 
Fred and George Weasley disappeared for a couple of 
hours and returned with armfuls of bottles of 
butterbeer, pumpkin fizz, and several bags full of 
Honeydukes sweets. 

“How did you do that?” squealed Angelina Johnson as 
George started throwing Peppermint Toads into the 
crowd. 

“With a little help from Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and 
Prongs,” Fred muttered in Harry’s ear. 

Only one person wasn’t joining in the festivities. 
Hermione, incredibly, was sitting in a corner, 
attempting to read an enormous book entitled Home 
Life and Social Habits of British Muggles. Harry broke 
away from the table where Fred and George had 
started juggling butterbeer bottles and went over to 
her. 

“Did you even come to the match?” he asked her. 

“Of course I did,” said Hermione in a strangely high- 
pitched voice, not looking up. “And I’m very glad we 

Page | 294 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




won, and I think you did really well, but I need to 
read this by Monday.” 

“Come on, Hermione, come and have some food,” 
Harry said, looking over at Ron and wondering 
whether he was in a good enough mood to bury the 
hatchet. 

“I can’t, Harry. I’ve still got four hundred and twenty- 
two pages to read!” said Hermione, now sounding 
slightly hysterical. “Anyway ...” She glanced over at 
Ron too. “He doesn’t want me to join in.” 

There was no arguing with this, as Ron chose that 
moment to say loudly, “If Scabbers hadn’t just been 
eaten, he could have had some of those Fudge Flies. 
He used to really like them — ” 

Hermione burst into tears. Before Harry could say or 
do anything, she tucked the enormous book under 
her arm, and, still sobbing, ran toward the staircase 
to the girls’ dormitories and out of sight. 

“Can’t you give her a break?” Harry asked Ron 
quietly. 

“No,” said Ron flatly. “If she just acted like she was 
sorry — but she’ll never admit she’s wrong, Hermione. 
She’s still acting like Scabbers has gone on vacation 
or something.” 

The Gryffindor party ended only when Professor 
McGonagall turned up in her tartan dressing gown 
and hair net at one in the morning, to insist that they 
all go to bed. Harry and Ron climbed the stairs to 
their dormitory, still discussing the match. At last, 
exhausted, Harry climbed into bed, twitched the 
hangings of his four-poster shut to block out a ray of 



Page | 295 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




moonlight, lay back, and felt himself almost instantly 
drifting off to sleep. ... 

He had a very strange dream. He was walking 
through a forest, his Firebolt over his shoulder, 
following something silvery- white. It was winding its 
way through the trees ahead, and he could only catch 
glimpses of it between the leaves. Anxious to catch up 
with it, he sped up, but as he moved faster, so did his 
quarry. Harry broke into a run, and ahead he heard 
hooves gathering speed. Now he was running flat out, 
and ahead he could hear galloping. Then he turned a 
corner into a clearing and — 

“AAAAAAAAAAAAAARRRRRRRRRRRRGGGGGHHHHH 
! NOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO!” 

Harry woke as suddenly as though he’d been hit in 
the face. Disoriented in the total darkness, he 
fumbled with his hangings — he could hear 
movements around him, and Seamus Finnigan’s voice 
from the other side of the room: “What’s going on?” 

Harry thought he heard the dormitory door slam. At 
last finding the divide in his curtains, he ripped them 
back, and at the same moment, Dean Thomas lit his 
lamp. 

Ron was sitting up in bed, the hangings torn from one 
side, a look of utmost terror on his face. 

“Black! Sirius Black! With a knife!” 

“What?” 

“Here! Just now! Slashed the curtains! Woke me up!” 
“You sure you weren’t dreaming, Ron?” said Dean. 



Page | 296 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Look at the curtains! I tell you, he was here!” 

They all scrambled out of bed; Harry reached the 
dormitory door first, and they sprinted back down the 
staircase. Doors opened behind them, and sleepy 
voices called after them. 

“Who shouted?” 

“What ’re you doing?” 

The common room was lit with the glow of the dying 
fire, still littered with the debris from the party. It was 
deserted. 

“Are you sure you weren’t dreaming, Ron?” 

“I’m telling you, I saw him!” 

“What’s all the noise?” 

“Professor McGonagall told us to go to bed!” 

A few of the girls had come down their staircase, 
pulling on dressing gowns and yawning. Boys, too, 
were reappearing. 

“Excellent, are we carrying on?” said Fred Weasley 
brightly. 

“Everyone back upstairs!” said Percy, 
hurrying into the common room and pinning his 
Head Boy badge to his pajamas as he spoke. 

“Perce — Sirius Black!” said Ron faintly. “In our 
dormitory! With a knife! Woke me up!” 

The common room went very still. 



Page | 297 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Nonsense!” said Percy, looking startled. “You had too 
much to eat, Ron — had a nightmare — ” 



“I’m telling you — ” 

“Now, really, enough’s enough!” 

Professor McGonagall was back. She slammed the 
portrait behind her as she entered the common room 
and stared furiously around. 

“I am delighted that Gryffindor won the match, but 
this is getting ridiculous! Percy, I expected better of 
you!” 

“I certainly didn’t authorize this, Professor!” said 
Percy, puffing himself up indignantly. “I was just 
telling them all to get back to bed! My brother Ron 
here had a nightmare — ” 

“IT WASNT A NIGHTMARE!” Ron yelled. 

“PROFESSOR, I WOKE UP, AND SIRIUS BLACK WAS 
STANDING OVER ME, HOLDING A KNIFE!” 

Professor McGonagall stared at him. 

“Don’t be ridiculous, Weasley, how could he possibly 
have gotten through the portrait hole?” 

“Ask him!” said Ron, pointing a shaking finger at the 
back of Sir Cadogan’s picture. “Ask him if he saw — ” 

Glaring suspiciously at Ron, Professor McGonagall 
pushed the portrait back open and went outside. The 
whole common room listened with bated breath. 

“Sir Cadogan, did you just let a man enter Gryffindor 
Tower?” 

Page | 298 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Certainly, good lady!” cried Sir Cadogan. 

There was a stunned silence, both inside and outside 
the common room. 

“You — you did?” said Professor McGonagall. “But — 
but the password!” 

“He had ’em!” said Sir Cadogan proudly. “Had the 
whole week’s, my lady! Read ’em off a little piece of 
paper!” 

Professor McGonagall pulled herself back through the 
portrait hole to face the stunned crowd. She was 
white as chalk. 

“Which person,” she said, her voice shaking, “which 
abysmally foolish person wrote down this week’s 
passwords and left them lying around?” 

There was utter silence, broken by the smallest of 
terrified squeaks. Neville Longbottom, trembling from 
head to fluffy-slippered toes, raised his hand slowly 
into the air. 



Page | 299 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






SNAPE’S GRUDGE 

No one in Gryffindor Tower slept that night. They 
knew that the castle was being searched again, and 
the whole House stayed awake in the common room, 
waiting to hear whether Black had been caught. 
Professor McGonagall came back at dawn, to tell 
them that he had again escaped. 

Throughout the day, everywhere they went they saw 
signs of tighter security; Professor Flitwick could be 
seen teaching the front doors to recognize a large 
picture of Sirius Black; Filch was suddenly bustling 
up and down the corridors, boarding up everything 
from tiny cracks in the walls to mouse holes. Sir 
Cadogan had been fired. His portrait had been taken 
back to its lonely landing on the seventh floor, and 
the Fat Lady was back. She had been expertly 
restored, but was still extremely nervous, and had 
agreed to return to her job only on condition that she 
was given extra protection. A bunch of surly security 
trolls had been hired to guard her. They paced the 
corridor in a menacing group, talking in grunts and 
comparing the size of their clubs. 

Page | 300 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



Harry couldn’t help noticing that the statue of the 
one-eyed witch on the third floor remained unguarded 
and unblocked. It seemed that Fred and George had 
been right in thinking that they — and now Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione — were the only ones who knew 
about the hidden passageway within it. 

“D’you reckon we should tell someone?” Harry asked 
Ron. 

“We know he’s not coming in through Honey duke’s,” 
said Ron dismissively “We’d’ve heard if the shop had 
been broken into.” 

Harry was glad Ron took this view. If the one-eyed 
witch was boarded up too, he would never be able to 
go into Hogsmeade again. 

Ron had become an instant celebrity. For the first 
time in his life, people were paying more attention to 
him than to Harry, and it was clear that Ron was 
rather enjoying the experience. Though still severely 
shaken by the night’s events, he was happy to tell 
anyone who asked what had happened, with a wealth 
of detail. 

"... I was asleep, and I heard this ripping noise, and I 
thought it was in my dream, you know? But then 
there was this draft ... I woke up and one side of the 
hangings on my bed had been pulled down. ... I rolled 
over . . . and I saw him standing over me . . . like a 
skeleton, with loads of filthy hair . . . holding this great 
long knife, must’ve been twelve inches ... and he 
looked at me, and I looked at him, and then I yelled, 
and he scampered. 

“Why, though?” Ron added to Harry as the group of 
second-year girls who had been listening to his 
chilling tale departed. “Why did he run?” 

Page | 301 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry had been wondering the same thing. Why had 
Black, having got the wrong bed, not silenced Ron 
and proceeded to Harry? Black had proved twelve 
years ago that he didn’t mind murdering innocent 
people, and this time he had been facing five 
unarmed boys, four of whom were asleep. 

“He must’ve known he’d have a job getting back out of 
the castle once you’d yelled and woken people up,” 
said Harry thoughtfully. “He’d’ve had to kill the whole 
House to get back through the portrait hole . . . then 
he would’ve met the teachers. ...” 

Neville was in total disgrace. Professor McGonagall 
was so furious with him she had banned him from all 
future Hogsmeade visits, given him a detention, and 
forbidden anyone to give him the password into the 
tower. Poor Neville was forced to wait outside the 
common room every night for somebody to let him in, 
while the security trolls leered unpleasantly at him. 
None of these punishments, however, came close to 
matching the one his grandmother had in store for 
him. Two days after Black’s break-in, she sent Neville 
the very worst thing a Hogwarts student could receive 
over breakfast — a Howler. 

The school owls swooped into the Great Hall carrying 
the mail as usual, and Neville choked as a huge barn 
owl landed in front of him, a scarlet envelope clutched 
in its beak. Harry and Ron, who were sitting opposite 
him, recognized the letter as a Howler at once — Ron 
had got one from his mother the year before. 

“Run for it, Neville,” Ron advised. 

Neville didn’t need telling twice. He seized the 
envelope, and holding it before him like a bomb, 
sprinted out of the hall, while the Slytherin table 
exploded with laughter at the sight of him. They 

Page | 302 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




heard the Howler go off in the entrance hall — 
Neville’s grandmother’s voice, magically magnified to 
a hundred times its usual volume, shrieking about 
how he had brought shame on the whole family. 

Harry was too busy feeling sorry for Neville to notice 
immediately that he had a letter too. Hedwig got his 
attention by nipping him sharply on the wrist. 

“Ouch! Oh — thanks, Hedwig.” 

Harry tore open the envelope while Hedwig helped 
herself to some of Neville’s cornflakes. The note inside 
said: 

Dear Harry and Ron, 

How about having tea with me this afternoon ’round 
six? 



I’ll come and collect you from the castle. 

WAIT FOR ME IN THE ENTRANCE HALL; 

YOU’RE NOT ALLOWED OUT ON YOUR OWN 
Cheers, 

Hagrid 

“He probably wants to hear all about Black!” said 
Ron. 

So at six o’clock that afternoon, Harry and Ron left 
Gryffindor Tower, passed the security trolls at a run, 
and headed down to the entrance hall. 

Hagrid was already waiting for them. 



Page | 303 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“All right, Hagrid!” said Ron. “S’pose you want to hear 
about Saturday night, do you?” 

“I’ve already heard all abou’ it,” said Hagrid, opening 
the front doors and leading them outside. 

“Oh,” said Ron, looking slightly put out. 

The first thing they saw on entering Hagrid’s cabin 
was Buckbeak, who was stretched out on top of 
Hagrid’s patchwork quilt, his enormous wings folded 
tight to his body, enjoying a large plate of dead 
ferrets. Averting his eyes from this unpleasant sight, 
Harry saw a gigantic, hairy brown suit and a very 
horrible yellow-and-orange tie hanging from the top of 
Hagrid’s wardrobe door. 

“What are they for, Hagrid?” said Harry. 

“Buckbeak’s case against the Committee fer the 
Disposal o’ Dangerous Creatures,” said Hagrid. “This 
Friday. Him an’ me’ll be goin’ down ter London 
together. I’ve booked two beds on the Knight Bus. ...” 

Harry felt a nasty pang of guilt. He had completely 
forgotten that Buckbeak’s trial was so near, and 
judging by the uneasy look on Ron’s face, he had too. 
They had also forgotten their promise about helping 
him prepare Buckbeak’s defense; the arrival of the 
Firebolt had driven it clean out of their minds. 

Hagrid poured them tea and offered them a plate of 
Bath buns, but they knew better than to accept; they 
had had too much experience with Hagrid’s cooking. 

“I got somethin’ ter discuss with you two,” said 
Hagrid, sitting himself between them and looking 
uncharacteristically serious. 



Page | 304 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“What?” said Harry. 

“Hermione,” said Hagrid. 

“What about her?” said Ron. 

“She’s in a righ’ state, that’s what. She’s bin cornin’ 
down ter visit me a lot since Chris ’mas. Bin feelin’ 
lonely. Firs’ yeh weren’ talking to her because o’ the 
Firebolt, now yer not talkin’ to her because her cat — ” 

“ — ate Scabbers!” Ron interjected angrily. 

“Because her cat acted like all cats do,” Hagrid 
continued doggedly. “She’s cried a fair few times, yeh 
know. Goin’ through a rough time at the moment. 
Bitten off more’n she can chew, if yeh ask me, all the 
work she’s tryin’ ter do. Still found time ter help me 
with Buckbeak’s case, mind. ... She’s found some 
really good stuff fer me ... reckon he’ll stand a good 
chance now. ...” 

“Hagrid, we should’ve helped as well — sorry — ” 

Harry began awkwardly. 

“I’m not blamin’ yeh!” said Hagrid, waving Harry’s 
apology aside. “Gawd knows yeh’ve had enough ter be 
gettin’ on with. I’ve seen yeh practicin’ Quidditch ev’ry 
hour o’ the day an’ night — but I gotta tell yeh, I 
thought you two’d value yer friend more’n 
broomsticks or rats. Tha’s all.” 

Harry and Ron exchanged uncomfortable looks. 

“Really upset, she was, when Black nearly stabbed 
yeh, Ron. She’s got her heart in the right place, 
Hermione has, an’ you two not talkin’ to her — ” 



Page | 305 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“If she’d just get rid of that cat, I’d speak to her 
again!” Ron said angrily. “But she’s still sticking up 
for it! It’s a maniac, and she won’t hear a word 
against it!” 

“Ah, well, people can be a bit stupid abou’ their pets,” 
said Hagrid wisely. Behind him, Buckbeak spat a few 
ferret bones onto Hagrid’s pillow. 

They spent the rest of their visit discussing 
Gryffindor’s improved chances for the Quidditch Cup. 
At nine o’clock, Hagrid walked them back up to the 
castle. 

A large group of people was bunched around the 
bulletin board when they returned to the common 
room. 

“Hogsmeade, next weekend!” said Ron, craning over 
the heads to read the new notice. “What d’you 
reckon?” he added quietly to Harry as they went to sit 
down. 

“Well, Filch hasn’t done anything about the passage 
into Honeydukes. ...” Harry said, even more quietly. 

“Harry!” said a voice in his right ear. Harry started 
and looked around at Hermione, who was sitting at 
the table right behind them and clearing a space in 
the wall of books that had been hiding her. 

“Harry, if you go into Hogsmeade again ... I’ll tell 
Professor McGonagall about that map!” said 
Hermione. 

“Can you hear someone talking, Harry?” growled Ron, 
not looking at Hermione. 



Page | 306 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ron, how can you let him go with you? After what 
Sirius Black nearly did to youl I mean it, I’ll tell — ” 

“So now you’re trying to get Harry expelled!” said Ron 
furiously. “Haven’t you done enough damage this 
year?” 

Hermione opened her mouth to respond, but with a 
soft hiss, Crookshanks leapt onto her lap. Hermione 
took one frightened look at the expression on Ron’s 
face, gathered up Crookshanks, and hurried away 
toward the girls’ dormitories. 

“So how about it?” Ron said to Harry as though there 
had been no interruption. “Come on, last time we 
went you didn’t see anything. You haven’t even been 
inside Zonko’s yet!” 

Harry looked around to check that Hermione was well 
out of earshot. 

“Okay,” he said. “But I’m taking the Invisibility Cloak 
this time.” 

On Saturday morning, Harry packed his Invisibility 
Cloak in his bag, slipped the Marauder’s Map into his 
pocket, and went down to breakfast with everyone 
else. Hermione kept shooting suspicious looks down 
the table at him, but he avoided her eye and was 
careful to let her see him walking back up the marble 
staircase in the entrance hall as everybody else 
proceeded to the front doors. 

“ ’Bye!” Harry called to Ron. “See you when you get 
back!” 

Ron grinned and winked. 



Page | 307 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry hurried up to the third floor, slipping the 
Marauder’s Map out of his pocket as he went. 
Crouching behind the one-eyed witch, he smoothed it 
out. A tiny dot was moving in his direction. Harry 
squinted at it. The minuscule writing next to it read 
Neville Longbottom. 

Harry quickly pulled out his wand, muttered, 

“ Dissendium).” and shoved his bag into the statue, but 
before he could climb in himself, Neville came around 
the corner. 

“Harry! I forgot you weren’t going to Hogsmeade 
either!” 

“Hi, Neville,” said Harry, moving swiftly away from the 
statue and pushing the map back into his pocket. 
“What are you up to?” 

“Nothing,” shrugged Neville. “Want a game of 
Exploding Snap?” 

“Er — not now — I was going to go to the library and 
do that vampire essay for Lupin — ” 

“I’ll come with you!” said Neville brightly. “I haven’t 
done it either!” 

“Er — hang on — yeah, I forgot, I finished it last 
night!” 

“Great, you can help me!” said Neville, his round face 
anxious. “I don’t understand that thing about the 
garlic at all — do they have to eat it, or — ” 

He broke off with a small gasp, looking over Harry’s 
shoulder. 

It was Snape. Neville took a quick step behind Harry. 

Page | 308 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“And what are you two doing here?” said Snape, 
coming to a halt and looking from one to the other. 
“An odd place to meet — ” 

To Harry’s immense disquiet, Snape’s black eyes 
flicked to the doorways on either side of them, and 
then to the one-eyed witch. 

“We’re not — meeting here,” said Harry. “We just — 
met here.” 

“Indeed?” said Snape. “You have a habit of turning up 
in unexpected places, Potter, and you are very rarely 
there for no good reason. ... I suggest the pair of you 
return to Gryffindor Tower, where you belong.” 

Harry and Neville set off without another word. As 
they turned the corner, Harry looked back. Snape was 
running one of his hands over the one-eyed witch’s 
head, examining it closely. 

Harry managed to shake Neville off at the Fat Lady by 
telling him the password, then pretending he’d left his 
vampire essay in the library and doubling back. Once 
out of sight of the security trolls, he pulled out the 
map again and held it close to his nose. 

The third floor corridor seemed to be deserted. Harry 
scanned the map carefully and saw, with a leap of 
relief, that the tiny dot labeled Severus Snape was 
now back in its office. 

He sprinted back to the one-eyed witch, opened her 
hump, heaved himself inside, and slid down to meet 
his bag at the bottom of the stone chute. He wiped 
the Marauder’s Map blank again, then set off at a 
run. 



Page | 309 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry, completely hidden beneath the Invisibility 
Cloak, emerged into the sunlight outside Honeydukes 
and prodded Ron in the back. 

“It’s me,” he muttered. 

“What kept you?” Ron hissed. 

“Snape was hanging around. ...” 

They set off up the High Street. 

“Where are you?” Ron kept muttering out of the 
corner of his mouth. “Are you still there? This feels 
weird. ...” 

They went to the post office; Ron pretended to be 
checking the price of an owl to Bill in Egypt so that 
Harry could have a good look around. The owls sat 
hooting softly down at him, at least three hundred of 
them; from Great Grays right down to tiny little Scops 
owls (“Local Deliveries Only”), which were so small 
they could have sat in the palm of Harry’s hand. 

Then they visited Zonko’s, which was so packed with 
students Harry had to exercise great care not to tread 
on anyone and cause a panic. There were jokes and 
tricks to fulfill even Fred’s and George’s wildest 
dreams; Harry gave Ron whispered orders and passed 
him some gold from under the cloak. They left 
Zonko’s with their money bags considerably lighter 
than they had been on entering, but their pockets 
bulging with Dungbombs, Hiccup Sweets, Frog Spawn 
Soap, and a Nose-Biting Teacup apiece. 

The day was fine and breezy, and neither of them felt 
like staying indoors, so they walked past the Three 
Broomsticks and climbed a slope to visit the 
Shrieking Shack, the most haunted dwelling in 

Page | 310 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Britain. It stood a little way above the rest of the 
village, and even in daylight was slightly creepy, with 
its boarded windows and dank overgrown garden. 

“Even the Hogwarts ghosts avoid it,” said Ron as they 
leaned on the fence, looking up at it. “I asked Nearly 
Headless Nick ... he says he’s heard a very rough 
crowd lives here. No one can get in. Fred and George 
tried, obviously, but all the entrances are sealed shut. 



Harry, feeling hot from their climb, was just 
considering taking off the cloak for a few minutes 
when they heard voices nearby. Someone was 
climbing toward the house from the other side of the 
hill; moments later, Malfoy had appeared, followed 
closely by Crabbe and Goyle. Malfoy was speaking. 

"... should have an owl from Father any time now. He 
had to go to the hearing to tell them about my arm . . . 
about how I couldn’t use it for three months. ...” 

Crabbe and Goyle sniggered. 

“I really wish I could hear that great hairy moron 
trying to defend himself ... There’s no ’arm in ’im, 
’onest — ’ . . . that hippogriff’s as good as dead — ” 

Malfoy suddenly caught sight of Ron. His pale face 
split in a malevolent grin. 

“What are you doing, Weasley?” 

Malfoy looked up at the crumbling house behind Ron. 

“Suppose you’d love to live here, wouldn’t you, 
Weasley? Dreaming about having your own bedroom? 

I heard your family all sleep in one room — is that 
true?” 

Page | 311 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry seized the back of Ron’s robes to stop him from 
leaping on Malfoy. 

“Leave him to me,” he hissed in Ron’s ear. 

The opportunity was too perfect to miss. Harry crept 
silently around behind Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle, 
bent down, and scooped a large handful of mud out of 
the path. 

“We were just discussing your friend Hagrid,” Malfoy 
said to Ron. “Just trying to imagine what he’s saying 
to the Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous 
Creatures. D’you think he’ll cry when they cut off his 
hippogriff’s — ” 

SPLAT. 

Malfoy’s head jerked forward as the mud hit him; his 
silver-blond hair was suddenly dripping in muck. 

“What the — ?” 

Ron had to hold onto the fence to keep himself 
standing, he was laughing so hard. Malfoy, Crabbe, 
and Goyle spun stupidly on the spot, staring wildly 
around, Malfoy trying to wipe his hair clean. 

“What was that? Who did that?” 

“Very haunted up here, isn’t it?” said Ron, with the 
air of one commenting on the weather. 

Crabbe and Goyle were looking scared. Their bulging 
muscles were no use against ghosts. Malfoy was 
staring madly around at the deserted landscape. 



Page | 312 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry sneaked along the path, where a particularly 
sloppy puddle yielded some foul-smelling, green 
sludge. 

SPLATTER. 

Crabbe and Goyle caught some this time. Goyle 
hopped furiously on the spot, trying to rub it out of 
his small, dull eyes. 

“It came from over there!” said Malfoy, wiping his 
face, and staring at a spot some six feet to the left of 
Harry. 

Crabbe blundered forward, his long arms 
outstretched like a zombie. Harry dodged around him, 
picked up a stick, and lobbed it at Crabbe ’s back. 
Harry doubled up with silent laughter as Crabbe did a 
kind of pirouette in midair, trying to see who had 
thrown it. As Ron was the only person Crabbe could 
see, it was Ron he started toward, but Harry stuck 
out his leg. Crabbe stumbled — and his huge, flat foot 
caught the hem of Harry’s cloak. Harry felt a great 
tug, then the cloak slid off his face. 

For a split second, Malfoy stared at him. 

“AAARGH!” he yelled, pointing at Harry’s head. Then 
he turned tail and ran, at breakneck speed, back 
down the hill, Crabbe and Goyle behind him. 

Harry tugged the cloak up again, but the damage was 
done. 

“Harry!” Ron said, stumbling forward and staring 
hopelessly at the point where Harry had disappeared, 
“you’d better run for it! If Malfoy tells anyone — you’d 
better get back to the castle, quick — ” 



Page | 313 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“See you later,” said Harry, and without another 
word, he tore back down the path toward Hogsmeade. 



Would Malfoy believe what he had seen? Would 
anyone believe Malfoy? Nobody knew about the 
Invisibility Cloak — nobody except Dumbledore. 
Harry’s stomach turned over — Dumbledore would 
know exactly what had happened, if Malfoy said 
anything — 

Back into Honeydukes, back down the cellar steps, 
across the stone floor, through the trapdoor — Harry 
pulled off the cloak, tucked it under his arm, and ran, 
flat out, along the passage. ... Malfoy would get back 
first . . . how long would it take him to find a teacher? 
Panting, a sharp pain in his side, Harry didn’t slow 
down until he reached the stone slide. He would have 
to leave the cloak where it was, it was too much of a 
giveaway in case Malfoy had tipped off a teacher — he 
hid it in a shadowy corner, then started to climb, fast 
as he could, his sweaty hands slipping on the sides of 
the chute. He reached the inside of the witch’s hump, 
tapped it with his wand, stuck his head through, and 
hoisted himself out; the hump closed, and just as 
Harry jumped out from behind the statue, he heard 
quick footsteps approaching. 

It was Snape. He approached Harry at a swift walk, 
his black robes swishing, then stopped in front of 
him. 

“So,” he said. 

There was a look of suppressed triumph about him. 
Harry tried to look innocent, all too aware of his 
sweaty face and his muddy hands, which he quickly 
hid in his pockets. 

“Come with me, Potter,” said Snape. 

Page | 314 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry followed him downstairs, trying to wipe his 
hands clean on the inside of his robes without Snape 
noticing. They walked down the stairs to the 
dungeons and then into Snape’s office. 

Harry had been in here only once before, and he had 
been in very serious trouble then too. Snape had 
acquired a few more slimy horrible things in jars 
since last time, all standing on shelves behind his 
desk, glinting in the firelight and adding to the 
threatening atmosphere. 

“Sit,” said Snape. 

Harry sat. Snape, however, remained standing. 

“Mr. Malfoy has just been to see me with a strange 
story, Potter,” said Snape. 

Harry didn’t say anything. 

“He tells me that he was up by the Shrieking Shack 
when he ran into Weasley — apparently alone.” 

Still, Harry didn’t speak. 

“Mr. Malfoy states that he was standing talking to 
Weasley, when a large amount of mud hit him in the 
back of the head. How do you think that could have 
happened?” 

Harry tried to look mildly surprised. 

“I don’t know, Professor.” 

Snape’s eyes were boring into Harry’s. It was exactly 
like trying to stare down a hippogriff. Harry tried hard 
not to blink. 



Page | 315 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Mr. Malfoy then saw an extraordinary apparition. 

Can you imagine what it might have been, Potter?” 

“No,” said Harry, now trying to sound innocently 
curious. 

“It was your head, Potter. Floating in midair.” 

There was a long silence. 

“Maybe he’d better go to Madam Pomfrey,” said Harry. 
“If he’s seeing things like — ” 

“What would your head have been doing in 
Hogsmeade, Potter?” said Snape softly. “Your head is 
not allowed in Hogsmeade. No part of your body has 
permission to be in Hogsmeade.” 

“I know that,” said Harry, striving to keep his face free 
of guilt or fear. “It sounds like Malfoy’s having 
hallucin — ” 

“Malfoy is not having hallucinations,” snarled Snape, 
and he bent down, a hand on each arm of Harry’s 
chair, so that their faces were a foot apart. “If your 
head was in Hogsmeade, so was the rest of you.” 

“I’ve been up in Gryffindor Tower,” said Harry. “Like 
you told — ” 

“Can anyone confirm that?” 

Harry didn’t say anything. Snape’s thin mouth curled 
into a horrible smile. 

“So,” he said, straightening up again. “Everyone from 
the Minister of Magic downward has been trying to 
keep famous Harry Potter safe from Sirius Black. But 
famous Harry Potter is a law unto himself. Let the 

Page | 316 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




ordinary people worry about his safety! Famous Harry 
Potter goes where he wants to, with no thought for 
the consequences.” 

Harry stayed silent. Snape was trying to provoke him 
into telling the truth. He wasn’t going to do it. Snape 
had no proof — yet. 

“How extraordinarily like your father you are, Potter,” 
Snape said suddenly, his eyes glinting. “He too was 
exceedingly arrogant. A small amount of talent on the 
Quidditch field made him think he was a cut above 
the rest of us too. Strutting around the place with his 
friends and admirers . . . The resemblance between you 
is uncanny.” 

“My dad didn’t strut,” said Harry, before he could stop 
himself. “And neither do I.” 

“Your father didn’t set much store by rules either,” 
Snape went on, pressing his advantage, his thin face 
full of malice. “Rules were for lesser mortals, not 
Quidditch Cup-winners. His head was so swollen — ” 

“SHUT UP!” 

Harry was suddenly on his feet. Rage such as he had 
not felt since his last night in Privet Drive was 
coursing through him. He didn’t care that Snape’s 
face had gone rigid, the black eyes flashing 
dangerously. 

“ What did you say to me, Potter?” 

“I told you to shut up about my dad!” Harry yelled. “I 
know the truth, all right? He saved your life! 
Dumbledore told me! You wouldn’t even be here if it 
wasn’t for my dad!” 



Page | 317 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Snape’s sallow skin had gone the color of sour milk. 

“And did the headmaster tell you the circumstances 
in which your father saved my life?” he whispered. 

“Or did he consider the details too unpleasant for 
precious Potter’s delicate ears?” 

Harry bit his lip. He didn’t know what had happened 
and didn’t want to admit it — but Snape seemed to 
have guessed the truth. 

“I would hate for you to run away with a false idea of 
your father, Potter,” he said, a terrible grin twisting 
his face. “Have you been imagining some act of 
glorious heroism? Then let me correct you — your 
saintly father and his friends played a highly amusing 
joke on me that would have resulted in my death if 
your father hadn’t got cold feet at the last moment. 
There was nothing brave about what he did. He was 
saving his own skin as much as mine. Had their joke 
succeeded, he would have been expelled from 
Hogwarts.” 

Snape’s uneven, yellowish teeth were bared. 

“Turn out your pockets, Potter!” he spat suddenly. 

Harry didn’t move. There was a pounding in his ears. 

“Turn out your pockets, or we go straight to the 
headmaster! Pull them out, Potter!” 

Cold with dread, Harry slowly pulled out the bag of 
Zonko’s tricks and the Marauder’s Map. 

Snape picked up the Zonko’s bag. 



Page | 318 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ron gave them to me,” said Harry, praying he’d get a 
chance to tip Ron off before Snape saw him. “He — 
brought them back from Hogsmeade last time — ” 

“Indeed? And you’ve been carrying them around ever 
since? How very touching . . . and what is this?” 

Snape had picked up the map. Harry tried with all his 
might to keep his face impassive. 

“Spare bit of parchment,” he said with a shrug. 

Snape turned it over, his eyes on Harry. 

“Surely you don’t need such a very old piece of 
parchment?” he said. “Why don’t I just — throw this 
away?” 

His hand moved toward the fire. 

“No!” Harry said quickly. 

“So!” said Snape, his long nostrils quivering. “Is this 
another treasured gift from Mr. Weasley? Or is it — 
something else? A letter, perhaps, written in invisible 
ink? Or — instructions to get into Hogsmeade without 
passing the dementors?” 

Harry blinked. Snape ’s eyes gleamed. 

“Let me see, let me see ... ,” he muttered, taking out 
his wand and smoothing the map out on his desk. 
“Reveal your secret!” he said, touching the wand to 
the parchment. 

Nothing happened. Harry clenched his hands to stop 
them from shaking. 



Page | 319 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Show yourself!” Snape said, tapping the map 
sharply. 

It stayed blank. Harry was taking deep, calming 
breaths. 

“Professor Severus Snape, master of this school, 
commands you to yield the information you conceal!” 
Snape said, hitting the map with his wand. 

As though an invisible hand were writing upon it, 
words appeared on the smooth surface of the map. 

“Mr. Moony presents his compliments to Professor 
Snape, and begs him to keep his abnormally large 
nose out of other people’s business.” 

Snape froze. Harry stared, dumbstruck, at the 
message. But the map didn’t stop there. More writing 
was appearing beneath the first. 

“Mr. Prongs agrees with Mr. Moony, and would like to 
add that Professor Snape is an ugly git.” 

It would have been very funny if the situation hadn’t 
been so serious. And there was more. ... 

“Mr. Padfoot would like to register his astonishment 
that an idiot like that ever became a professor.” 

Harry closed his eyes in horror. When he’d opened 
them, the map had had its last word. 

“Mr. Wormtail bids Professor Snape good day, and 
advises him to wash his hair, the slimeball.” 

Harry waited for the blow to fall. 

“So ... ,” said Snape softly. “We’ll see about this. ...” 

Page | 320 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He strode across to his fire, seized a fistful of 
glittering powder from ajar on the fireplace, and 
threw it into the flames. 

“Lupin!” Snape called into the fire. “I want a word!” 

Utterly bewildered, Harry stared at the fire. A large 
shape had appeared in it, revolving very fast. Seconds 
later, Professor Lupin was clambering out of the 
fireplace, brushing ash off his shabby robes. 

“You called, Severus?” said Lupin mildly. 

“I certainly did,” said Snape, his face contorted with 
fury as he strode back to his desk. “I have just asked 
Potter to empty his pockets. He was carrying this.” 

Snape pointed at the parchment, on which the words 
of Messrs. Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and Prongs 
were still shining. An odd, closed expression appeared 
on Lupin’s face. 

“Well?” said Snape. 

Lupin continued to stare at the map. Harry had the 
impression that Lupin was doing some very quick 
thinking. 

“Well?” said Snape again. “This parchment is plainly 
full of Dark Magic. This is supposed to be your area of 
expertise, Lupin. Where do you imagine Potter got 
such a thing?” 

Lupin looked up and, by the merest half-glance in 
Harry’s direction, warned him not to interrupt. 

“Full of Dark Magic?” he repeated mildly. “Do you 
really think so, Severus? It looks to me as though it is 
merely a piece of parchment that insults anybody who 

Page | 321 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




reads it. Childish, but surely not dangerous? I 
imagine Harry got it from a joke shop — ” 

“Indeed?” said Snape. His jaw had gone rigid with 
anger. “You think a joke shop could supply him with 
such a thing? You don’t think it more likely that he 
got it directly from the manufacturers?” 

Harry didn’t understand what Snape was talking 
about. Nor, apparently, did Lupin. 

“You mean, by Mr. Wormtail or one of these people?” 
he said. “Harry, do you know any of these men?” 

“No,” said Harry quickly. 

“You see, Severus?” said Lupin, turning back to 
Snape. “It looks like a Zonko product to me — ” 

Right on cue, Ron came bursting into the office. He 
was completely out of breath, and stopped just short 
of Snape ’s desk, clutching the stitch in his chest and 
trying to speak. 

“I — gave — Harry — that — stuff,” he choked. 
“Bought — it ... in Zonko ’s ... ages — ago ...” 

“Well!” said Lupin, clapping his hands together and 
looking around cheerfully. “That seems to clear that 
up! Severus, I’ll take this back, shall I?” He folded the 
map and tucked it inside his robes. “Harry, Ron, 
come with me, I need a word about my vampire essay 
— excuse us, Severus — ” 

Harry didn’t dare look at Snape as they left his office. 
He, Ron, and Lupin walked all the way back into the 
entrance hall before speaking. Then Harry turned to 
Lupin. 



Page | 322 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Professor, I — ” 



“I don’t want to hear explanations,” said Lupin 
shortly. He glanced around the empty entrance hall 
and lowered his voice. “I happen to know that this 
map was confiscated by Mr. Filch many years ago. 

Yes, I know it’s a map,” he said as Harry and Ron 
looked amazed. “I don’t want to know how it fell into 
your possession. I am, however, astounded that you 
didn’t hand it in. Particularly after what happened the 
last time a student left information about the castle 
lying around. And I can’t let you have it back, Harry.” 

Harry had expected that, and was too keen for 
explanations to protest. 

“Why did Snape think I’d got it from the 
manufacturers?” 

“Because ... ,” Lupin hesitated, “because these 
mapmakers would have wanted to lure you out of 
school. They’d think it extremely entertaining.” 

“Do you know them?” said Harry, impressed. 

“We’ve met,” he said shortly. He was looking at Harry 
more seriously than ever before. 

“Don’t expect me to cover up for you again, Harry. I 
cannot make you take Sirius Black seriously. But I 
would have thought that what you have heard when 
the dementors draw near you would have had more of 
an effect on you. Your parents gave their lives to keep 
you alive, Harry. A poor way to repay them — 
gambling their sacrifice for a bag of magic tricks.” 

He walked away, leaving Harry feeling worse by far 
than he had at any point in Snape ’s office. Slowly, he 
and Ron mounted the marble staircase. As Harry 

Page | 323 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




passed the one-eyed witch, he remembered the 
Invisibility Cloak — it was still down there, but he 
didn’t dare go and get it. 



“It’s my fault,” said Ron abruptly. “I persuaded you to 
go. Lupin’s right, it was stupid, we shouldn’t’ve done 



it — ” 



He broke off; they reached the corridor where the 
security trolls were pacing, and Hermione was 
walking toward them. One look at her face convinced 
Harry that she had heard what had happened. His 
heart plummeted — had she told Professor 
McGonagall? 

“Come to have a good gloat?” said Ron savagely as 
she stopped in front of them. “Or have you just been 
to tell on us?” 

“No,” said Hermione. She was holding a letter in her 
hands and her lip was trembling. “I just thought you 
ought to know ... Hagrid lost his case. Buckbeak is 
going to be executed.” 



Page | 324 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






THE QUIDDITCH FINAL 

“He — he sent me this,” Hermione said, holding out 
the letter. 

Harry took it. The parchment was damp, and 
enormous teardrops had smudged the ink so badly in 
places that it was very difficult to read. 

Dear Hermione, 

We lost I’m allowed to bring him back to Hogwarts. 
Execution date to be fixed. 

Beaky has enjoyed London. 

I won’t forget all the help you gave us. 

Hagrid 

“They can’t do this,” said Harry. “They can’t. 
Buckbeak isn’t dangerous.” 



Page | 325 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



“Malfoy’s dad’s frightened the Committee into it,” said 
Hermione, wiping her eyes. “You know what he’s like. 
They’re a bunch of doddery old fools, and they were 
scared. There’ll be an appeal, though, there always is. 
Only I can’t see any hope. ... Nothing will have 
changed.” 

“Yeah, it will,” said Ron fiercely. “You won’t have to do 
all the work alone this time, Hermione. I’ll help.” 

“Oh, Ron!” 

Hermione flung her arms around Ron’s neck and 
broke down completely. Ron, looking quite terrified, 
patted her very awkwardly on the top of the head. 
Finally, Hermione drew away. 

“Ron, I’m really, really sorry about Scabbers ... ,” she 
sobbed. 

“Oh — well — he was old,” said Ron, looking 
thoroughly relieved that she had let go of him. “And 
he was a bit useless. You never know, Mum and Dad 
might get me an owl now.” 

The safety measures imposed on the students since 
Black’s second break-in made it impossible for Harry, 
Ron, and Hermione to go and visit Hagrid in the 
evenings. Their only chance of talking to him was 
during Care of Magical Creatures lessons. 

He seemed numb with shock at the verdict. 

“S’all my fault. Got all tongue-tied. They was all sittin’ 
there in black robes an’ I kep’ droppin’ me notes and 
forgettin’ all them dates yeh looked up fer me, 
Hermione. An’ then Lucius Malfoy stood up an’ said 
his bit, and the Committee jus’ did exac’ly what he 
told ’em. ...” 

Page | 326 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“There’s still the appeal!” said Ron fiercely. “Don’t give 
up yet, we’re working on it!” 

They were walking back up to the castle with the rest 
of the class. Ahead they could see Malfoy, who was 
walking with Crabbe and Goyle, and kept looking 
back, laughing derisively. 

“S’no good, Ron,” said Hagrid sadly as they reached 
the castle steps. “That Committee’s in Lucius Malfoy ’s 
pocket. I’m jus’ gonna make sure the rest o’ Beaky’s 
time is the happiest he’s ever had. I owe him that. ...” 

Hagrid turned around and hurried back toward his 
cabin, his face buried in his handkerchief. 

“Look at him blubber!” 

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle had been standing just 
inside the castle doors, listening. 

“Have you ever seen anything quite as pathetic?” said 
Malfoy. “And he’s supposed to be our teacher!” 

Harry and Ron both made furious moves toward 
Malfoy, but Hermione got there first — SMACK! 

She had slapped Malfoy across the face with all the 
strength she could muster. Malfoy staggered. Harry, 
Ron, Crabbe, and Goyle stood flabbergasted as 
Hermione raised her hand again. 

“Don’t you dare call Hagrid pathetic, you foul — you 
evil — ” 

“Hermione!” said Ron weakly, and he tried to grab her 
hand as she swung it back. 

“Get off, Ron!” 

Page | 327 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione pulled out her wand. Malfoy stepped 
backward. Crabbe and Goyle looked at him for 
instructions, thoroughly bewildered. 

“C’mon,” Malfoy muttered, and in a moment, all three 
of them had disappeared into the passageway to the 
dungeons. 

“Hermionel” Ron said again, sounding both stunned 
and impressed. 

“Harry, you’d better beat him in the Quidditch final!” 
Hermione said shrilly. “You just better had, because I 
can’t stand it if Slytherin wins!” 

“We’re due in Charms,” said Ron, still goggling at 
Hermione. “We’d better go.” 

They hurried up the marble staircase toward 
Professor Flitwick’s classroom. 

“You’re late, boys!” said Professor Flitwick reprovingly 
as Harry opened the classroom door. “Come along, 
quickly, wands out, we’re experimenting with 
Cheering Charms today, we’ve already divided into 
pairs — ” 

Harry and Ron hurried to a desk at the back and 
opened their bags. Ron looked behind him. 

“Where’s Hermione gone?” 

Harry looked around too. Hermione hadn’t entered 
the classroom, yet Harry knew she had been right 
next to him when he had opened the door. 

“That’s weird,” said Harry, staring at Ron. “Maybe — 
maybe she went to the bathroom or something?” 



Page | 328 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




But Hermione didn’t turn up all lesson. 

“She could’ve done with a Cheering Charm on her 
too,” said Ron as the class left for lunch, all grinning 
broadly — the Cheering Charms had left them with a 
feeling of great contentment. 

Hermione wasn’t at lunch either. By the time they 
had finished their apple pie, the after-effects of the 
Cheering Charms were wearing off, and Harry and 
Ron had started to get slightly worried. 

“You don’t think Malfoy did something to her?” Ron 
said anxiously as they hurried upstairs toward 
Gryffindor Tower. 

They passed the security trolls, gave the Fat Lady the 
password (“Flibbertigibbet”), and scrambled through 
the portrait hole into the common room. 

Hermione was sitting at a table, fast asleep, her head 
resting on an open Arithmancy book. They went to sit 
down on either side of her. Harry prodded her awake. 

“Wh — what?” said Hermione, waking with a start 
and staring wildly around. “Is it time to go? W — 
which lesson have we got now? 

“Divination, but it’s not for another twenty minutes,” 
said Harry. “Hermione, why didn’t you come to 
Charms?” 

“What? Oh no!” Hermione squeaked. “I forgot to go to 
Charms!” 

“But how could you forget?” said Harry. “You were 
with us till we were right outside the classroom!” 



Page | 329 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I don’t believe it!” Hermione wailed. “Was Professor 
Flitwick angry? Oh, it was Malfoy, I was thinking 
about him and I lost track of things!” 

“You know what, Hermione?” said Ron, looking down 
at the enormous Arithmancy book Hermione had 
been using as a pillow. “I reckon you’re cracking up. 
You’re trying to do too much.” 

“No, I’m not!” said Hermione, brushing her hair out of 
her eyes and staring hopelessly around for her bag. “I 
just made a mistake, that’s all! I’d better go and see 
Professor Flitwick and say sorry. ... I’ll see you in 
Divination!” 

Hermione joined them at the foot of the ladder to 
Professor Trelawney’s classroom twenty minutes later, 
looking extremely harassed. 

“I can’t believe I missed Cheering Charms! And I bet 
they come up in our exams; Professor Flitwick hinted 
they might!” 

Together they climbed the ladder into the dim, stifling 
tower room. Glowing on every little table was a crystal 
ball full of pearly white mist. Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione sat down together at the same rickety table. 

“I thought we weren’t starting crystal balls until next 
term,” Ron muttered, casting a wary eye around for 
Professor Trelawney, in case she was lurking nearby. 

“Don’t complain, this means we’ve finished 
palmistry,” Harry muttered back. “I was getting sick 
of her flinching every time she looked at my hands.” 

“Good day to you!” said the familiar, misty voice, and 
Professor Trelawney made her usual dramatic 
entrance out of the shadows. Parvati and Lavender 

Page | 330 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




quivered with excitement, their faces lit by the milky 
glow of their crystal ball. 



“I have decided to introduce the crystal ball a little 
earlier than I had planned,” said Professor Trelawney, 
sitting with her back to the fire and gazing around. 
“The fates have informed me that your examination in 
June will concern the Orb, and I am anxious to give 
you sufficient practice.” 

Hermione snorted. 

“Well, honestly ... ‘the fates have informed her’ ... who 
sets the exam? She does! What an amazing 
prediction!” she said, not troubling to keep her voice 
low. Harry and Ron choked back laughs. 

It was hard to tell whether Professor Trelawney had 
heard them, as her face was hidden in shadow. She 
continued, however, as though she had not. 

“Crystal gazing is a particularly refined art,” she said 
dreamily. “I do not expect any of you to See when first 
you peer into the Orb’s infinite depths. We shall start 
by practicing relaxing the conscious mind and 
external eyes” — Ron began to snigger uncontrollably 
and had to stuff his fist in his mouth to stifle the 
noise — “so as to clear the Inner Eye and the 
superconscious. Perhaps, if we are lucky, some of you 
will See before the end of the class.” 

And so they began. Harry, at least, felt extremely 
foolish, staring blankly at the crystal ball, trying to 
keep his mind empty when thoughts such as “this is 
stupid” kept drifting across it. It didn’t help that Ron 
kept breaking into silent giggles and Hermione kept 
tutting. 



Page | 331 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Seen anything yet?” Harry asked them after a 
quarter of an hour’s quiet crystal gazing. 

“Yeah, there’s a burn on this table,” said Ron, 
pointing. “Someone’s spilled their candle.” 

“This is such a waste of time,” Hermione hissed. “I 
could be practicing something useful. I could be 
catching up on Cheering Charms — ” 

Professor Trelawney rustled past. 

“Would anyone like me to help them interpret the 
shadowy portents within their Orb?” she murmured 
over the clinking of her bangles. 

“I don’t need help,” Ron whispered. “It’s obvious what 
this means. There’s going to be loads of fog tonight.” 

Both Harry and Hermione burst out laughing. 

“Now, really!” said Professor Trelawney as everyone’s 
heads turned in their direction. Parvati and Lavender 
were looking scandalized. “You are disturbing the 
clairvoyant vibrations!” She approached their table 
and peered into their crystal ball. Harry felt his heart 
sinking. He was sure he knew what was coming — 

“There is something here!” Professor Trelawney 
whispered, lowering her face to the ball, so that it was 
reflected twice in her huge glasses. “Something 
moving . . . but what is it?” 

Harry was prepared to bet everything he owned, 
including his Firebolt, that it wasn’t good news, 
whatever it was. And sure enough — 

“My dear ... ,” Professor Trelawney breathed, gazing 
up at Harry. “It is here, plainer than ever before ... my 

Page | 332 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




dear, stalking toward you, growing ever closer ... the 
Gr — ” 



“Oh, for goodness’ sake!” said Hermione loudly. “Not 
that ridiculous Grim again\” 

Professor Trelawney raised her enormous eyes to 
Hermione ’s face. Parvati whispered something to 
Lavender, and they both glared at Hermione too. 
Professor Trelawney stood up, surveying Hermione 
with unmistakable anger. 

“I am sorry to say that from the moment you have 
arrived in this class, my dear, it has been apparent 
that you do not have what the noble art of Divination 
requires. Indeed, I don’t remember ever meeting a 
student whose mind was so hopelessly mundane.” 

There was a moment’s silence. Then — 

“Fine!” said Hermione suddenly, getting up and 
cramming Unfogging the Future back into her bag. 
“Fine!” she repeated, swinging the bag over her 
shoulder and almost knocking Ron off his chair. “I 
give up! I’m leaving!” 

And to the whole class’s amazement, Hermione strode 
over to the trapdoor, kicked it open, and climbed 
down the ladder out of sight. 

It took a few minutes for the class to settle down 
again. Professor Trelawney seemed to have forgotten 
all about the Grim. She turned abruptly from Harry 
and Ron’s table, breathing rather heavily as she 
tugged her gauzy shawl more closely to her. 

“Ooooo!” said Lavender suddenly, making everyone 
start. “Oooooo, Professor Trelawney, I’ve just 
remembered! You saw her leaving, didn’t you? Didn’t 

Page | 333 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




you, Professor? ‘Around Easter, one of our number will 
leave us forever*.’ You said it ages ago, Professor!” 

Professor Trelawney gave her a dewy smile. 

“Yes, my dear, I did indeed know that Miss Granger 
would be leaving us. One hopes, however, that one 
might have mistaken the Signs. ... The Inner Eye can 
be a burden, you know. ...” 

Lavender and Parvati looked deeply impressed, and 
moved over so that Professor Trelawney could join 
their table instead. 

“Some day Hermione’s having, eh?” Ron muttered to 
Harry, looking awed. 

“Yeah ...” 

Harry glanced into the crystal ball but saw nothing 
but swirling white mist. Had Professor Trelawney 
really seen the Grim again? Would he? The last thing 
he needed was another near-fatal accident, with the 
Quidditch final drawing ever nearer. 

The Easter holidays were not exactly relaxing. The 
third years had never had so much homework. Neville 
Longbottom seemed close to a nervous collapse, and 
he wasn’t the only one. 

“Call this a holiday!” Seamus Finnigan roared at the 
common room one afternoon. “The exams are ages 
away, what’re they playing at?” 

But nobody had as much to do as Hermione. Even 
without Divination, she was taking more subjects 
than anybody else. She was usually last to leave the 
common room at night, first to arrive at the library 



Page | 334 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




the next morning; she had shadows like Lupin’s 
under her eyes, and seemed constantly close to tears. 

Ron had taken over responsibility for Buckbeak’s 
appeal. When he wasn’t doing his own work, he was 
poring over enormously thick volumes with names 
like The Handbook of Hippogriff Psychology and Fowl 
or Foul? A Study of Hippogriff Brutality. He was so 
absorbed, he even forgot to be horrible to 
Crookshanks. 

Harry, meanwhile, had to fit in his homework around 
Quidditch practice every day, not to mention endless 
discussions of tactics with Wood. The Gryffindor- 
Slytherin match would take place on the first 
Saturday after the Easter holidays. Slytherin was 
leading the tournament by exactly two hundred 
points. This meant (as Wood constantly reminded his 
team) that they needed to win the match by more 
than that amount to win the Cup. It also meant that 
the burden of winning fell largely on Harry, because 
capturing the Snitch was worth one hundred and fifty 
points. 

“So you must catch it only if we’re more than fifty 
points up,” Wood told Harry constantly. “Only if we’re 
more than fifty points up, Harry, or we win the match 
but lose the Cup. You’ve got that, haven’t you? You 
must catch the Snitch only if we’re — ” 

“I KNOW, OLIVER!” Harry yelled. 

The whole of Gryffindor House was obsessed with the 
coming match. Gryffindor hadn’t won the Quidditch 
Cup since the legendary Charlie Weasley (Ron’s 
second oldest brother) had been Seeker. But Harry 
doubted whether any of them, even Wood, wanted to 
win as much as he did. The enmity between Harry 
and Malfoy was at its highest point ever. Malfoy was 
Page | 335 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




still smarting about the mud-throwing incident in 
Hogsmeade and was even more furious that Harry 
had somehow wormed his way out of punishment. 
Harry hadn’t forgotten Malfoy’s attempt to sabotage 
him in the match against Ravenclaw, but it was the 
matter of Buckbeak that made him most determined 
to beat Malfoy in front of the entire school. 

Never, in anyone’s memory, had a match approached 
in such a highly charged atmosphere. By the time the 
holidays were over, tension between the two teams 
and their Houses was at the breaking point. A 
number of small scuffles broke out in the corridors, 
culminating in a nasty incident in which a Gryffindor 
fourth year and a Slytherin sixth year ended up in the 
hospital wing with leeks sprouting out of their ears. 

Harry was having a particularly bad time of it. He 
couldn’t walk to class without Slytherins sticking out 
their legs and trying to trip him up; Crabbe and Goyle 
kept popping up wherever he went, and slouching 
away looking disappointed when they saw him 
surrounded by people. Wood had given instructions 
that Harry should be accompanied everywhere he 
went, in case the Slytherins tried to put him out of 
action. The whole of Gryffindor House took up the 
challenge enthusiastically, so that it was impossible 
for Harry to get to classes on time because he was 
surrounded by a vast, chattering crowd. Harry was 
more concerned for his Firebolt’s safety than his own. 
When he wasn’t flying it, he locked it securely in his 
trunk and frequently dashed back up to Gryffindor 
Tower at break times to check that it was still there. 

All usual pursuits were abandoned in the Gryffindor 
common room the night before the match. Even 
Hermione had put down her books. 

“I can’t work, I can’t concentrate,” she said nervously. 

Page | 336 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




There was a great deal of noise. Fred and George 
Weasley were dealing with the pressure by being 
louder and more exuberant than ever. Oliver Wood 
was crouched over a model of a Quidditch field in the 
corner, prodding little figures across it with his wand 
and muttering to himself. Angelina, Alicia, and Katie 
were laughing at Fred’s and George’s jokes. Harry was 
sitting with Ron and Hermione, removed from the 
center of things, trying not to think about the next 
day, because every time he did, he had the horrible 
sensation that something very large was fighting to 
get out of his stomach. 

“You’re going to be fine,” Hermione told him, though 
she looked positively terrified. 

“You’ve got a Firebolti” said Ron. 

“Yeah ... ,” said Harry, his stomach writhing. 

It came as a relief when Wood suddenly stood up and 
yelled, “Team! Bed!” 



Harry slept badly. First he dreamed that he had 
overslept, and that Wood was yelling, “Where were 
you? We had to use Neville instead!” Then he dreamed 
that Malfoy and the rest of the Slytherin team arrived 
for the match riding dragons. He was flying at 
breakneck speed, trying to avoid a spurt of flames 
from Malfoy ’s steed’s mouth, when he realized he had 
forgotten his Firebolt. He fell through the air and 
woke with a start. 

It was a few seconds before Harry remembered that 
the match hadn’t taken place yet, that he was safe in 
bed, and that the Slytherin team definitely wouldn’t 
be allowed to play on dragons. He was feeling very 

Page | 337 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




thirsty. Quietly as he could, he got out of his four- 
poster and went to pour himself some water from the 
silver jug beneath the window. 

The grounds were still and quiet. No breath of wind 
disturbed the treetops in the Forbidden Forest; the 
Whomping Willow was motionless and innocent- 
looking. It looked as though the conditions for the 
match would be perfect. 

Harry set down his goblet and was about to turn back 
to his bed when something caught his eye. An animal 
of some kind was prowling across the silvery lawn. 

Harry dashed to his bedside table, snatched up his 
glasses, and put them on, then hurried back to the 
window. It couldn’t be the Grim — not now — not 
right before the match — 

He peered out at the grounds again and, after a 
minute’s frantic searching, spotted it. It was skirting 
the edge of the forest now. ... It wasn’t the Grim at all 
...it was a cat. ... Harry clutched the window ledge in 
relief as he recognized the bottlebrush tail. It was only 
Crookshanks. ... 

Or was it only Crookshanks? Harry squinted, 
pressing his nose flat against the glass. Crookshanks 
seemed to have come to a halt. Harry was sure he 
could see something else moving in the shadow of the 
trees too. 

And just then, it emerged — a gigantic, shaggy black 
dog, moving stealthily across the lawn, Crookshanks 
trotting at its side. Harry stared. What did this mean? 
If Crookshanks could see the dog as well, how could it 
be an omen of Harry’s death? 

“Ron!” Harry hissed. “Ron! Wake up!” 

Page | 338 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Huh?” 



“I need you to tell me if you can see something!” 

“S’all dark, Harry,” Ron muttered thickly. “What’re 
you on about?” 

“Down here — ” 

Harry looked quickly back out of the window. 

Crookshanks and the dog had vanished. Harry 
climbed onto the windowsill to look right down into 
the shadows of the castle, but they weren’t there. 
Where had they gone? 

A loud snore told him Ron had fallen asleep again. 

Harry and the rest of the Gryffindor team entered the 
Great Hall the next day to enormous applause. Harry 
couldn’t help grinning broadly as he saw that both 
the Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff tables were applauding 
them too. The Slytherin table hissed loudly as they 
passed. Harry noticed that Malfoy looked even paler 
than usual. 

Wood spent the whole of breakfast urging his team to 
eat, while touching nothing himself. Then he hurried 
them off to the field before anyone else had finished, 
so they could get an idea of the conditions. As they 
left the Great Hall, everyone applauded again. 

“Good luck, Harry!” called Cho. Harry felt himself 
blushing. 

“Okay — no wind to speak of — sun’s a bit bright, 
that could impair your vision, watch out for it — 

ground’s fairly hard, good, that’ll give us a fast kickoff 
?? 

Page | 339 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Wood paced the field, staring around with the team 
behind him. Finally, they saw the front doors of the 
castle open in the distance and the rest of the school 
spilling onto the lawn. 

“Locker rooms,” said Wood tersely. 

None of them spoke as they changed into their scarlet 
robes. Harry wondered if they were feeling like he 
was: as though he’d eaten something extremely 
wriggly for breakfast. In what seemed like no time at 
all, Wood was saying, “Okay, it’s time, let’s go — ” 

They walked out onto the field to a tidal wave of noise. 
Three-quarters of the crowd was wearing scarlet 
rosettes, waving scarlet flags with the Gryffindor lion 
upon them, or brandishing banners with slogans like 
“GO GRYFFINDOR!” and “LIONS FOR THE CUP!” 
Behind the Slytherin goal posts, however, two 
hundred people were wearing green; the silver serpent 
of Slytherin glittered on their flags, and Professor 
Snape sat in the very front row, wearing green like 
everyone else, and a very grim smile. 

“And here are the Gryffindors!” yelled Lee Jordan, 
who was acting as commentator as usual. “Potter, 

Bell, Johnson, Spinnet, Weasley, Weasley, and Wood. 
Widely acknowledged as the best team Hogwarts has 
seen in a good few years — ” 

Lee’s comments were drowned by a tide of “boos” from 
the Slytherin end. 

“And here come the Slytherin team, led by Captain 
Flint. He’s made some changes in the lineup and 
seems to be going for size rather than skill — ” 

More boos from the Slytherin crowd. Harry, however, 
thought Lee had a point. Malfoy was easily the 

Page | 340 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




smallest person on the Slytherin team; the rest of 
them were enormous. 



“Captains, shake hands!” said Madam Hooch. 

Flint and Wood approached each other and grasped 
each other’s hand very tightly; it looked as though 
each was trying to break the other’s fingers. 

“Mount your brooms!” said Madam Hooch. “Three ... 
two ... one ...” 

The sound of her whistle was lost in the roar from the 
crowd as fourteen brooms rose into the air. Harry felt 
his hair fly back off his forehead; his nerves left him 
in the thrill of the flight; he glanced around, saw 
Malfoy on his tail, and sped off in search of the 
Snitch. 

“And it’s Gryffindor in possession, Alicia Spinnet of 
Gryffindor with the Quaffle, heading straight for the 
Slytherin goal posts, looking good, Alicia! Argh, no — 
Quaffle intercepted by Warrington, Warrington of 
Slytherin tearing up the field — WHAM! — nice 
Bludger work there by George Weasley, Warrington 
drops the Quaffle, it’s caught by — Johnson, 
Gryffindor back in possession, come on, Angelina — 
nice swerve around Montague — duck, Angelina, 
that’s a Bludger] — SHE SCORES! TEN-ZERO TO 
GRYFFINDOR!” 

Angelina punched the air as she soared around the 
end of the field; the sea of scarlet below was 
screaming its delight — 

“OUCH!” 

Angelina was nearly thrown from her broom as 
Marcus Flint went smashing into her. 

Page | 341 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Sorry!” said Flint as the crowd below booed. “Sorry, 
didn’t see her!” 

A moment later, Fred Weasley chucked his Beater’s 
club at the back of Flint’s head. Flint’s nose smashed 
into the handle of his broom and began to bleed. 

“That will do!” shrieked Madam Hooch, zooming 
between them. “Penalty shot to Gryffindor for an 
unprovoked attack on their Chaser! Penalty shot to 
Slytherin for deliberate damage to their Chaser!” 

“Come off it, Miss!” howled Fred, but Madam Hooch 
blew her whistle and Alicia flew forward to take the 
penalty. 

“Come on, Alicia!” yelled Lee into the silence that had 
descended on the crowd. “YES! SHE’S BEATEN THE 
KEEPER! TWENTY-ZERO TO GRYFFINDOR!” 

Harry turned the Firebolt sharply to watch Flint, still 
bleeding freely, fly forward to take the Slytherin 
penalty. Wood was hovering in front of the Gryffindor 
goal posts, his jaw clenched. 

“ ’Course, Wood’s a superb Keeper!” Lee Jordan told 
the crowd as Flint waited for Madam Hooch’s whistle. 
“Superb! Very difficult to pass — very difficult indeed 

— YES! I DONT BELIEVE IT! HE’S SAVED IT!” 

Relieved, Harry zoomed away, gazing around for the 
Snitch, but still making sure he caught every word of 
Lee’s commentary. It was essential that he hold 
Malfoy off the Snitch until Gryffindor was more than 
fifty points up — 

“Gryffindor in possession, no, Slytherin in possession 

— no! — Gryffindor back in possession and it’s Katie 



Page | 342 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Bell, Katie Bell for Gryffindor with the Quaffle, she’s 
streaking up the field — THAT WAS DELIBERATE!” 



Montague, a Slytherin Chaser, had swerved in front of 
Katie, and instead of seizing the Quaffle had grabbed 
her head. Katie cartwheeled in the air, managed to 
stay on her broom, but dropped the Quaffle. 

Madam Hooch’s whistle rang out again as she soared 
over to Montague and began shouting at him. A 
minute later, Katie had put another penalty past the 
Slytherin Seeker. 

“THIRTY-ZERO! TAKE THAT, YOU DIRTY, CHEATING 



“Jordan, if you can’t commentate in an unbiased way 

— !” 

“I’m telling it like it is, Professor!” 

Harry felt a huge jolt of excitement. He had seen the 
Snitch — it was shimmering at the foot of one of the 
Gryffindor goal posts — but he mustn’t catch it yet — 
and if Malfoy saw it — 

Faking a look of sudden concentration, Harry pulled 
his Firebolt around and sped off toward the Slytherin 
end — it worked. Malfoy went haring after him, 
clearly thinking Harry had seen the Snitch there. ... 

WHOOSH. 

One of the Bludgers came streaking past Harry’s right 
ear, hit by the gigantic Slytherin Beater, Derrick. 

Then again — 

WHOOSH. 

Page | 343 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The second Bludger grazed Harry’s elbow. The other 
Beater, Bole, was closing in. 

Harry had a fleeting glimpse of Bole and Derrick 
zooming toward him, clubs raised — 

He turned the Firebolt upward at the last second, and 
Bole and Derrick collided with a sickening crunch. 

“Ha haaa!” yelled Lee Jordan as the Slytherin Beaters 
lurched away from each other, clutching their heads. 
“Too bad, boys! You’ll need to get up earlier than that 
to beat a Firebolt! And it’s Gryffindor in possession 
again, as Johnson takes the Quaffle — Flint alongside 
her — poke him in the eye, Angelina! — it was a joke, 
Professor, it was a joke — oh no — Flint in 
possession, Flint flying toward the Gryffindor goal 
posts, come on now, Wood, save — !” 

But Flint had scored; there was an eruption of cheers 
from the Slytherin end, and Lee swore so badly that 
Professor McGonagall tried to tug the magical 
megaphone away from him. 

“Sorry, Professor, sorry! Won’t happen again! So, 
Gryffindor in the lead, thirty points to ten, and 
Gryffindor in possession — ” 

It was turning into the dirtiest game Harry had ever 
played in. Enraged that Gryffindor had taken such an 
early lead, the Slytherins were rapidly resorting to any 
means to take the Quaffle. Bole hit Alicia with his 
club and tried to say he’d thought she was a Bludger. 
George Weasley elbowed Bole in the face in 
retaliation. Madam Hooch awarded both teams 
penalties, and Wood pulled off another spectacular 
save, making the score forty-ten to Gryffindor. 



Page | 344 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The Snitch had disappeared again. Malfoy was still 
keeping close to Harry as he soared over the match, 
looking around for it — once Gryffindor was fifty 
points ahead — 

Katie scored. Fifty-ten. Fred and George Weasley were 
swooping around her, clubs raised, in case any of the 
Slytherins were thinking of revenge. Bole and Derrick 
took advantage of Fred’s and George’s absence to aim 
both Bludgers at Wood; they caught him in the 
stomach, one after the other, and he rolled over in the 
air, clutching his broom, completely winded. 

Madam Hooch was beside herself. 

“YOU DO NOT ATTACK THE KEEPER UNLESS THE 
QUAFFLE IS WITHIN THE SCORING AREA!” she 
shrieked at Bole and Derrick. “Gryffindor penalty!” 

And Angelina scored. Sixty-ten. Moments later, Fred 
Weasley pelted a Bludger at Warrington, knocking the 
Quaffle out of his hands; Alicia seized it and put it 
through the Slytherin goal — seventy-ten. 

The Gryffindor crowd below was screaming itself 
hoarse — Gryffindor was sixty points in the lead, and 
if Harry caught the Snitch now, the Cup was theirs. 
Harry could almost feel hundreds of eyes following 
him as he soared around the field, high above the rest 
of the game, with Malfoy speeding along behind him. 

And then he saw it. The Snitch was sparkling twenty 
feet above him. 

Harry put on a huge burst of speed; the wind was 
roaring in his ears; he stretched out his hand, but 
suddenly, the Firebolt was slowing down — 



Page | 345 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Horrified, he looked around. Malfoy had thrown 
himself forward, grabbed hold of the Firebolt’s tail, 
and was pulling it back. 

“You — ” 

Harry was angry enough to hit Malfoy, but couldn’t 
reach — Malfoy was panting with the effort of holding 
onto the Firebolt, but his eyes were sparkling 
maliciously. He had achieved what he’d wanted to do 
— the Snitch had disappeared again. 

“Penalty! Penalty to Gryffindor! I’ve never seen such 
tactics!” Madam Hooch screeched, shooting up to 
where Malfoy was sliding back onto his Nimbus Two 
Thousand and One. 

“YOU CHEATING SCUM!” Lee Jordan was howling 
into the megaphone, dancing out of Professor 
McGonagall’s reach. “YOU FILTHY, CHEATING B — ” 

Professor McGonagall didn’t even bother to tell him 
off. She was actually shaking her finger in Malfoy’s 
direction, her hat had fallen off, and she too was 
shouting furiously. 

Alicia took Gryffindor’s penalty, but she was so angry 
she missed by several feet. The Gryffindor team was 
losing concentration and the Slytherins, delighted by 
Malfoy’s foul on Harry, were being spurred on to 
greater heights. 

“Slytherin in possession, Slytherin heading for goal — 
Montague scores — ” Lee groaned. “Seventy-twenty to 
Gryffindor. ...” 

Harry was now marking Malfoy so closely their knees 
kept hitting each other. Harry wasn’t going to let 
Malfoy anywhere near the Snitch. ... 

Page | 346 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Get out of it, Potter!” Malfoy yelled in frustration as 
he tried to turn and found Harry blocking him. 

“Angelina Johnson gets the Quaffle for Gryffindor, 
come on, Angelina, COME ON!” 

Harry looked around. Every single Slytherin player 
apart from Malfoy was streaking up the pitch toward 
Angelina, including the Slytherin Keeper — they were 
all going to block her — 

Harry wheeled the Firebolt around, bent so low he 
was lying flat along the handle, and kicked it forward. 
Like a bullet, he shot toward the Slytherins. 

“AAAAAAARRRGH ! ” 

They scattered as the Firebolt zoomed toward them; 
Angelina’s way was clear. 

“SHE SCORES! SHE SCORES! Gryffindor leads by 
eighty points to twenty!” 

Harry, who had almost pelted headlong into the 
stands, skidded to a halt in midair, reversed, and 
zoomed back into the middle of the field. 

And then he saw something to make his heart stand 
still. Malfoy was diving, a look of triumph on his face 
— there, a few feet above the grass below, was a tiny, 
golden glimmer — 

Harry urged the Firebolt downward, but Malfoy was 
miles ahead — 

“Go! Go! Go!” Harry urged his broom. He was gaining 
on Malfoy — Harry flattened himself to the broom 
handle as Bole sent a Bludger at him — he was at 
Malfoy’s ankles — he was level — 

Page | 347 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry threw himself forward, took both hands off his 
broom. He knocked Malfoy’s arm out of the way and 



“YES!” 

He pulled out of his dive, his hand in the air, and the 
stadium exploded. Harry soared above the crowd, an 
odd ringing in his ears. The tiny golden ball was held 
tight in his fist, beating its wings hopelessly against 
his fingers. 

Then Wood was speeding toward him, half-blinded by 
tears; he seized Harry around the neck and sobbed 
unrestrainedly into his shoulder. Harry felt two large 
thumps as Fred and George hit them; then 
Angelina’s, Alicia’s, and Katie’s voices, “We’ve won the 
Cup\ We’ve won the Cup\” Tangled together in a 
many-armed hug, the Gryffindor team sank, yelling 
hoarsely, back to earth. 

Wave upon wave of crimson supporters was pouring 
over the barriers onto the field. Hands were raining 
down on their backs. Harry had a confused 
impression of noise and bodies pressing in on him. 
Then he, and the rest of the team, were hoisted onto 
the shoulders of the crowd. Thrust into the light, he 
saw Hagrid, plastered with crimson rosettes — “Yeh 
beat ’em, Harry, yeh beat ’em! Wait till I tell 
Buckbeak!” There was Percy, jumping up and down 
like a maniac, all dignity forgotten. Professor 
McGonagall was sobbing harder even than Wood, 
wiping her eyes with an enormous Gryffindor flag; 
and there, fighting their way toward Harry, were Ron 
and Hermione. Words failed them. They simply 
beamed as Harry was borne toward the stands, where 
Dumbledore stood waiting with the enormous 
Quidditch Cup. 



Page | 348 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




If only there had been a dementor around. ... As a 
sobbing Wood passed Harry the Cup, as he lifted it 
into the air, Harry felt he could have produced the 
world’s best Patronus. 



Page | 349 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






PROFESSOR TRELAWNEY’S 
PREDICTION 

Harry’s euphoria at finally winning the Quidditch Cup 
lasted at least a week. Even the weather seemed to be 
celebrating; as June approached, the days became 
cloudless and sultry, and all anybody felt like doing 
was strolling onto the grounds and flopping down on 
the grass with several pints of iced pumpkin juice, 
perhaps playing a casual game of Gobstones or 
watching the giant squid propel itself dreamily across 
the surface of the lake. 

But they couldn’t. Exams were nearly upon them, and 
instead of lazing around outside, the students were 
forced to remain inside the castle, trying to bully their 
brains into concentrating while enticing wafts of 
summer air drifted in through the windows. Even 
Fred and George Weasley had been spotted working; 
they were about to take their O.W.L.s (Ordinary 
Wizarding Levels). Percy was getting ready to take his 
N.E.W.T.s (Nastily Exhausting Wizarding Tests), the 
highest qualification Hogwarts offered. As Percy 

Page | 350 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



hoped to enter the Ministry of Magic, he needed top 
grades. He was becoming increasingly edgy, and gave 
very severe punishments to anybody who disturbed 
the quiet of the common room in the evenings. In fact, 
the only person who seemed more anxious than Percy 
was Hermione. 

Harry and Ron had given up asking her how she was 
managing to attend several classes at once, but they 
couldn’t restrain themselves when they saw the exam 
schedule she had drawn up for herself. The first 
column read: 

Monday 

9 o’clock, Arithmancy 
9 o’clock, Transfiguration 
Lunch 

1 o’clock, Charms 
1 o’clock, Ancient Runes 

“Hermione?” Ron said cautiously, because she was 
liable to explode when interrupted these days. “Er — 
are you sure you’ve copied down these times right?” 

“What?” snapped Hermione, picking up the exam 
schedule and examining it. “Yes, of course I have.” 

“Is there any point asking how you’re going to sit for 
two exams at once?” said Harry. 

“No,” said Hermione shortly. “Have either of you seen 
my copy of Numerology and Gramatica?” 



Page | 351 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh, yeah, I borrowed it for a bit of bedtime reading,” 
said Ron, but very quietly. Hermione started shifting 
heaps of parchment around on her table, looking for 
the book. Just then, there was a rustle at the window 
and Hedwig fluttered through it, a note clutched tight 
in her beak. 

“It’s from Hagrid,” said Harry, ripping the note open. 
“Buckbeak’s appeal — it’s set for the sixth.” 

“That’s the day we finish our exams,” said Hermione, 
still looking everywhere for her Arithmancy book. 

“And they’re coming up here to do it,” said Harry, still 
reading from the letter. “Someone from the Ministry of 
Magic and — and an executioner.” 

Hermione looked up, startled. 

“They’re bringing the executioner to the appeal! But 
that sounds as though they’ve already decided!” 

“Yeah, it does,” said Harry slowly. 

“They can’t!” Ron howled. “I’ve spent ages reading up 
on stuff for him; they can’t just ignore it all!” 

But Harry had a horrible feeling that the Committee 
for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures had had its 
mind made up for it by Mr. Malfoy. Draco, who had 
been noticeably subdued since Gryffindor’s triumph 
in the Quidditch final, seemed to regain some of his 
old swagger over the next few days. From sneering 
comments Harry overheard, Malfoy was certain 
Buckbeak was going to be killed, and seemed 
thoroughly pleased with himself for bringing it about. 
It was all Harry could do to stop himself imitating 
Hermione and hitting Malfoy in the face on these 
occasions. And the worst thing of all was that they 
Page | 352 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




had no time or opportunity to go and see Hagrid, 
because the strict new security measures had not 
been lifted, and Harry didn’t dare retrieve his 
Invisibility Cloak from below the one-eyed witch. 

k k k 



Exam week began and an unnatural hush fell over 
the castle. The third years emerged from 
Transfiguration at lunchtime on Monday, limp and 
ashen-faced, comparing results and bemoaning the 
difficulty of the tasks they had been set, which had 
included turning a teapot into a tortoise. Hermione 
irritated the rest by fussing about how her tortoise 
had looked more like a turtle, which was the least of 
everyone else’s worries. 

“Mine still had a spout for a tail, what a nightmare. 



“Were the tortoises supposed to breathe steam?” 

“It still had a willow-patterned shell, d’you think 
that 11 count against me?” 

Then, after a hasty lunch, it was straight back 
upstairs for the Charms exam. Hermione had been 
right; Professor Flitwick did indeed test them on 
Cheering Charms. Harry slightly overdid his out of 
nerves and Ron, who was partnering him, ended up 
in fits of hysterical laughter and had to be led away to 
a quiet room for an hour before he was ready to 
perform the charm himself. After dinner, the students 
hurried back to their common rooms, not to relax, 
but to start studying for Care of Magical Creatures, 
Potions, and Astronomy. 



Page | 353 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid presided over the Care of Magical Creatures 
exam the following morning with a very preoccupied 
air indeed; his heart didn’t seem to be in it at all. He 
had provided a large tub of fresh flobberworms for the 
class, and told them that to pass the test, their 
flobberworm had to still be alive at the end of one 
hour. As flobberworms flourished best if left to their 
own devices, it was the easiest exam any of them had 
ever taken, and also gave Harry, Ron, and Hermione 
plenty of opportunity to speak to Hagrid. 

“Beaky’s gettin’ a bit depressed,” Hagrid told them, 
bending low on the pretense of checking that Harry’s 
flobberworm was still alive. “Bin cooped up too long. 
But still ... we’ll know day after tomorrow — one way 
or the other — ” 

They had Potions that afternoon, which was an 
unqualified disaster. Try as Harry might, he couldn’t 
get his Confusing Concoction to thicken, and Snape, 
standing watch with an air of vindictive pleasure, 
scribbled something that looked suspiciously like a 
zero onto his notes before moving away. 

Then came Astronomy at midnight, up on the tallest 
tower; History of Magic on Wednesday morning, in 
which Harry scribbled everything Florean Fortescue 
had ever told him about medieval witch-hunts, while 
wishing he could have had one of Fortescue ’s choco- 
nut sundaes with him in the stifling classroom. 
Wednesday afternoon meant Herbology, in the 
greenhouses under a baking-hot sun; then back to 
the common room once more, with sunburnt necks, 
thinking longingly of this time next day, when it 
would all be over. 

Their second to last exam, on Thursday morning, was 
Defense Against the Dark Arts. Professor Lupin had 
compiled the most unusual exam any of them had 

Page | 354 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




ever taken; a sort of obstacle course outside in the 
sun, where they had to wade across a deep paddling 
pool containing a grindylow, cross a series of potholes 
full of Red Caps, squish their way across a patch of 
marsh while ignoring misleading directions from a 
hinkypunk, then climb into an old trunk and battle 
with a new boggart. 

“Excellent, Harry,” Lupin muttered as Harry climbed 
out of the trunk, grinning. “Full marks.” 

Flushed with his success, Harry hung around to 
watch Ron and Hermione. Ron did very well until he 
reached the hinkypunk, which successfully confused 
him into sinking waist-high into the quagmire. 
Hermione did everything perfectly until she reached 
the trunk with the boggart in it. After about a minute 
inside it, she burst out again, screaming. 

“Hermione!” said Lupin, startled. “What’s the matter?” 

“P — P — Professor McGonagall!” Hermione gasped, 
pointing into the trunk. “Sh — she said I’d failed 
everything!” 

It took a little while to calm Hermione down. When at 
last she had regained a grip on herself, she, Harry, 
and Ron went back to the castle. Ron was still slightly 
inclined to laugh at Hermione ’s boggart, but an 
argument was averted by the sight that met them on 
the top of the steps. 

Cornelius Fudge, sweating slightly in his pinstriped 
cloak, was standing there staring out at the grounds. 
He started at the sight of Harry. 

“Hello there, Harry!” he said. “Just had an exam, I 
expect? Nearly finished?” 



Page | 355 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes,” said Harry. Hermione and Ron, not being on 
speaking terms with the Minister of Magic, hovered 
awkwardly in the background. 

“Lovely day,” said Fudge, casting an eye over the lake. 
“Pity ... pity ...” 

He sighed deeply and looked down at Harry. 

“I’m here on an unpleasant mission, Harry. The 
Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures 
required a witness to the execution of a mad 
hippogriff. As I needed to visit Hogwarts to check on 
the Black situation, I was asked to step in.” 

“Does that mean the appeal’s already happened?” Ron 
interrupted, stepping forward. 

“No, no, it’s scheduled for this afternoon,” said Fudge, 
looking curiously at Ron. 

“Then you might not have to witness an execution at 
all!” said Ron stoutly. “The hippogriff might get off!” 

Before Fudge could answer, two wizards came 
through the castle doors behind him. One was so 
ancient he appeared to be withering before their very 
eyes; the other was tall and strapping, with a thin 
black mustache. Harry gathered that they were 
representatives of the Committee for the Disposal of 
Dangerous Creatures, because the very old wizard 
squinted toward Hagrid’s cabin and said in a feeble 
voice, “Dear, dear, I’m getting too old for this. ... Two 
o’clock, isn’t it, Fudge?” 

The black-mustached man was fingering something in 
his belt; Harry looked and saw that he was running 
one broad thumb along the blade of a shining axe. 

Ron opened his mouth to say something, but 

Page | 356 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione nudged him hard in the ribs and jerked her 
head toward the entrance hall. 

“Why’d you stop me?” said Ron angrily as they 
entered the Great Hall for lunch. “Did you see them? 
They’ve even got the axe ready! This isn’t justice!” 

“Ron, your dad works for the Ministry, you can’t go 
saying things like that to his boss!” said Hermione, 
but she too looked very upset. “As long as Hagrid 
keeps his head this time, and argues his case 
properly, they can’t possibly execute Buckbeak. ...” 

But Harry could tell Hermione didn’t really believe 
what she was saying. All around them, people were 
talking excitedly as they ate their lunch, happily 
anticipating the end of the exams that afternoon, but 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione, lost in worry about Hagrid 
and Buckbeak, didn’t join in. 

Harry’s and Ron’s last exam was Divination; 
Hermione’s, Muggle Studies. They walked up the 
marble staircase together; Hermione left them on the 
first floor and Harry and Ron proceeded all the way 
up to the seventh, where many of their class were 
sitting on the spiral staircase to Professor Trelawney’s 
classroom, trying to cram in a bit of last-minute 
studying. 

“She’s seeing us all separately,” Neville informed them 
as they went to sit down next to him. He had his copy 
of Unfogging the Future open on his lap at the pages 
devoted to crystal gazing. “Have either of you ever 
seen anything in a crystal ball?” he asked them 
unhappily. 

“Nope,” said Ron in an offhand voice. He kept 
checking his watch; Harry knew that he was counting 
down the time until Buckbeak’s appeal started. 

Page | 357 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The line of people outside the classroom shortened 
very slowly. As each person climbed back down the 
silver ladder, the rest of the class hissed, “What did 
she ask? Was it okay?” 

But they all refused to say. 

“She says the crystal ball’s told her that if I tell you, 

I’ll have a horrible accident!” squeaked Neville as he 
clambered back down the ladder toward Harry and 
Ron, who had now reached the landing. 

“That’s convenient,” snorted Ron. “You know, I’m 
starting to think Hermione was right about her” — he 
jabbed his thumb toward the trapdoor overhead — 
“she’s a right old fraud.” 

“Yeah,” said Harry, looking at his own watch. It was 
now two o’clock. “Wish she’d hurry up ...” 

Parvati came back down the ladder glowing with 
pride. 

“She says I’ve got all the makings of a true Seer,” she 
informed Harry and Ron. “I saw loads of stuff. ... Well, 
good luck!” 

She hurried off down the spiral staircase toward 
Lavender. 

“Ronald Weasley,” said the familiar, misty voice from 
over their heads. Ron grimaced at Harry and climbed 
the silver ladder out of sight. Harry was now the only 
person left to be tested. He settled himself on the floor 
with his back against the wall, listening to a fly 
buzzing in the sunny window, his mind across the 
grounds with Hagrid. 



Page | 358 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Finally, after about twenty minutes, Ron’s large feet 
reappeared on the ladder. 

“How’d it go?” Harry asked him, standing up. 

“Rubbish,” said Ron. “Couldn’t see a thing, so I made 
some stuff up. Don’t think she was convinced, 
though. ...” 

“Meet you in the common room,” Harry muttered as 
Professor Trelawney’s voice called, “Harry Potter!” 

The tower room was hotter than ever before; the 
curtains were closed, the fire was alight, and the 
usual sickly scent made Harry cough as he stumbled 
through the clutter of chairs and tables to where 
Professor Trelawney sat waiting for him before a large 
crystal ball. 

“Good day, my dear,” she said softly. “If you would 
kindly gaze into the Orb. ... Take your time, now ... 
then tell me what you see within it. ...” 

Harry bent over the crystal ball and stared, stared as 
hard as he could, willing it to show him something 
other than swirling white fog, but nothing happened. 

“Well?” Professor Trelawney prompted delicately. 
“What do you see?” 

The heat was overpowering and his nostrils were 
stinging with the perfumed smoke wafting from the 
fire beside them. He thought of what Ron had just 
said, and decided to pretend. 

“Er — ” said Harry, “a dark shape ... um ...” 

“What does it resemble?” whispered Professor 
Trelawney. “Think, now ...” 

Page | 359 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry cast his mind around and it landed on 
Buckbeak. 

“A hippogriff,” he said firmly. 

“Indeed!” whispered Professor Trelawney, scribbling 
keenly on the parchment perched upon her knees. 
“My boy, you may well be seeing the outcome of poor 
Hagrid’s trouble with the Ministry of Magic! Look 
closer. . . . Does the hippogriff appear to . . . have its 
head?” 

“Yes,” said Harry firmly. 

“Are you sure?” Professor Trelawney urged him. “Are 
you quite sure, dear? You don’t see it writhing on the 
ground, perhaps, and a shadowy figure raising an axe 
behind it?” 

“No!” said Harry, starting to feel slightly sick. 

“No blood? No weeping Hagrid?” 

“No!” said Harry again, wanting more than ever to 
leave the room and the heat. “It looks fine, it’s — 
flying away. ...” 

Professor Trelawney sighed. 

“Well, dear, I think we’ll leave it there. ... A little 
disappointing ... but I’m sure you did your best.” 

Relieved, Harry got up, picked up his bag and turned 
to go, but then a loud, harsh voice spoke behind him. 

“It will happen tonight.” 



Page | 360 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry wheeled around. Professor Trelawney had gone 
rigid in her armchair; her eyes were unfocused and 
her mouth sagging. 

“S — sorry?” said Harry. 

But Professor Trelawney didn’t seem to hear him. Her 
eyes started to roll. Harry sat there in a panic. She 
looked as though she was about to have some sort of 
seizure. He hesitated, thinking of running to the 
hospital wing — and then Professor Trelawney spoke 
again, in the same harsh voice, quite unlike her own: 

“The Dark Lord lies alone and friendless, abandoned 
by his followers. His servant has been chained these 
twelve years. Tonight, before midnight ... the servant 
will break free and set out to rejoin his master. The 
Dark Lord will rise again with his servant’s aid, 
greater and more terrible than ever he was. Tonight ... 
before midnight . . . the servant . . . will set out ... to 
rejoin ... his master. ...” 

Professor Trelawney’s head fell forward onto her 
chest. She made a grunting sort of noise. Harry sat 
there, staring at her. Then, quite suddenly, Professor 
Trelawney’s head snapped up again. 

“I’m so sorry, dear boy,” she said dreamily, “the heat 
of the day, you know ... I drifted off for a moment. ...” 

Harry sat there, staring at her. 

“Is there anything wrong, my dear?” 

“You — you just told me that the — the Dark Lord’s 
going to rise again ... that his servant’s going to go 
back to him. ...” 

Professor Trelawney looked thoroughly startled. 

Page | 361 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“The Dark Lord? He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named? My 
dear boy, that’s hardly something to joke about. ... 
Rise again, indeed — ” 

“But you just said it! You said the Dark Lord — ” 

“I think you must have dozed off too, dear!” said 
Professor Trelawney. “I would certainly not presume 
to predict anything quite as far-fetched as that\” 

Harry climbed back down the ladder and the spiral 
staircase, wondering ... had he just heard Professor 
Trelawney make a real prediction? Or had that been 
her idea of an impressive end to the test? 

Five minutes later he was dashing past the security 
trolls outside the entrance to Gryffindor Tower, 
Professor Trelawney’s words still resounding in his 
head. People were striding past him in the opposite 
direction, laughing and joking, heading for the 
grounds and a bit of long-awaited freedom; by the 
time he had reached the portrait hole and entered the 
common room, it was almost deserted. Over in the 
corner, however, sat Ron and Hermione. 

“Professor Trelawney,” Harry panted, “just told me — ” 

But he stopped abruptly at the sight of their faces. 

“Buckbeak lost,” said Ron weakly. “Hagrid’s just sent 
this.” 

Hagrid’s note was dry this time, no tears had 
splattered it, yet his hand seemed to have shaken so 
much as he wrote that it was hardly legible. 

Lost appeal. They’re going to execute at sunset 



Nothing you can do. Don’t come down. 

Page | 362 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




I don’t want you to see it 
Hagrid 

“We’ve got to go,” said Harry at once. “He can’t just sit 
there on his own, waiting for the executioner!” 

“Sunset, though,” said Ron, who was staring out the 
window in a glazed sort of way. “We’d never be 
allowed ... ’specially you, Harry. ...” 

Harry sank his head into his hands, thinking. 

“If we only had the Invisibility Cloak. ...” 

“Where is it?” said Hermione. 

Harry told her about leaving it in the passageway 
under the one-eyed witch. 

"... if Snape sees me anywhere near there again, I’m 
in serious trouble,” he finished. 

“That’s true,” said Hermione, getting to her feet. “If he 
sees you. ... How do you open the witch’s hump 
again?” 

“You — you tap it and say, ‘Dissendium,’ ” said Harry. 
“But — ” 

Hermione didn’t wait for the rest of his sentence; she 
strode across the room, pushed open the Fat Lady’s 
portrait and vanished from sight. 

“She hasn’t gone to get it?” Ron said, staring after 
her. 



Page | 363 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




She had. Hermione returned a quarter of an hour 
later with the silvery cloak folded carefully under her 
robes. 

“Hermione, I don’t know what’s gotten into you 
lately!” said Ron, astounded. “First you hit Malfoy, 
then you walk out on Professor Trelawney — ” 

Hermione looked rather flattered. 

They went down to dinner with everybody else, but 
did not return to Gryffindor Tower afterward. Harry 
had the cloak hidden down the front of his robes; he 
had to keep his arms folded to hide the lump. They 
skulked in an empty chamber off the entrance hall, 
listening, until they were sure it was deserted. They 
heard a last pair of people hurrying across the hall 
and a door slamming. Hermione poked her head 
around the door. 

“Okay,” she whispered, “no one there — cloak on — ” 

Walking very close together so that nobody would see 
them, they crossed the hall on tiptoe beneath the 
cloak, then walked down the stone front steps into 
the grounds. The sun was already sinking behind the 
Forbidden Forest, gilding the top branches of the 
trees. 

They reached Hagrid’s cabin and knocked. He was a 
minute in answering, and when he did, he looked all 
around for his visitor, pale-faced and trembling. 

“It’s us,” Harry hissed. “We’re wearing the Invisibility 
Cloak. Let us in and we can take it off.” 

“Yeh shouldn’ve come!” Hagrid whispered, but he 
stood back, and they stepped inside. Hagrid shut the 
door quickly and Harry pulled off the cloak. 

Page | 364 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid was not crying, nor did he throw himself upon 
their necks. He looked like a man who did not know 
where he was or what to do. This helplessness was 
worse to watch than tears. 

“Wan’ some tea?” he said. His great hands were 
shaking as he reached for the kettle. 

“Where’s Buckbeak, Hagrid?” said Hermione 
hesitantly. 

“I — I took him outside,” said Hagrid, spilling milk all 
over the table as he filled up the jug. “He’s tethered in 
me pumpkin patch. Thought he oughta see the trees 
an’ — an’ smell fresh air — before — ” 

Hagrid ’s hand trembled so violently that the milk jug 
slipped from his grasp and shattered all over the 
floor. 

“I’ll do it, Hagrid,” said Hermione quickly, hurrying 
over and starting to clean up the mess. 

“There’s another one in the cupboard,” Hagrid said, 
sitting down and wiping his forehead on his sleeve. 
Harry glanced at Ron, who looked back hopelessly. 

“Isn’t there anything anyone can do, Hagrid?” Harry 
asked fiercely, sitting down next to him. “Dumbledore 



“He’s tried,” said Hagrid. “He’s got no power ter 
overrule the Committee. He told ’em Buckbeak’s all 
right, but they’re scared. ... Yeh know what Lucius 
Malfoy’s like ... threatened ’em, I expect ... an’ the 
executioner, Macnair, he’s an old pal o’ Malfoy’s ... 
but it’ll be quick an’ clean ... an’ I’ll be beside him. ...” 



Page | 365 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hagrid swallowed. His eyes were darting all over the 
cabin as though looking for some shred of hope or 
comfort. 

“Dumbledore ’s gonna come down while it — while it 
happens. Wrote me this mornin’. Said he wants ter — 
ter be with me. Great man, Dumbledore. ...” 

Hermione, who had been rummaging in Hagrid ’s 
cupboard for another milk jug, let out a small, quickly 
stifled sob. She straightened up with the new jug in 
her hands, fighting back tears. 

“Well stay with you too, Hagrid,” she began, but 
Hagrid shook his shaggy head. 

“Yeh’re ter go back up ter the castle. I told yeh, I don’ 
wan’ yeh watchin’. An’ yeh shouldn’ be down here 
anyway. ... If Fudge an’ Dumbledore catch yeh out 
without permission, Harry, yehll be in big trouble.” 

Silent tears were now streaming down Hermione ’s 
face, but she hid them from Hagrid, bustling around 
making tea. Then, as she picked up the milk bottle to 
pour some into the jug, she let out a shriek. 

“Ron! I — I don’t believe it — it’s Scabbersl” 

Ron gaped at her. 

“What are you talking about?” 

Hermione carried the milk jug over to the table and 
turned it upside down. With a frantic squeak, and 
much scrambling to get back inside, Scabbers the rat 
came sliding out onto the table. 

“Scabbers!” said Ron blankly. “Scabbers, what are 
you doing here?” 

Page | 366 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He grabbed the struggling rat and held him up to the 
light. Scabbers looked dreadful. He was thinner than 
ever, large tufts of hair had fallen out leaving wide 
bald patches, and he writhed in Ron’s hands as 
though desperate to free himself. 

“It’s okay, Scabbers!” said Ron. “No cats! There’s 
nothing here to hurt you!” 

Hagrid suddenly stood up, his eyes fixed on the 
window. His normally ruddy face had gone the color 
of parchment. 

“They’re cornin’. ...” 

Harry, Ron, and Hermione whipped around. A group 
of men was walking down the distant castle steps. In 
front was Albus Dumbledore, his silver beard 
gleaming in the dying sun. Next to him trotted 
Cornelius Fudge. Behind them came the feeble old 
Committee member and the executioner, Macnair. 

“Yeh gotta go,” said Hagrid. Every inch of him was 
trembling. “They mustn’ find yeh here. ... Go now. ...” 

Ron stuffed Scabbers into his pocket and Hermione 
picked up the cloak. 

“I’ll let yeh out the back way,” said Hagrid. 

They followed him to the door into his back garden. 
Harry felt strangely unreal, and even more so when 
he saw Buckbeak a few yards away, tethered to a tree 
behind Hagrid’s pumpkin patch. Buckbeak seemed to 
know something was happening. He turned his sharp 
head from side to side and pawed the ground 
nervously. 



Page | 367 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It’s okay, Beaky,” said Hagrid softly. “It’s okay ...” He 
turned to Harry, Ron, and Hermione. “Go on,” he 
said. “Get goin’.” 

But they didn’t move. 

“Hagrid, we can’t — ” 

“Well tell them what really happened — ” 

“They can’t kill him — ” 

“Go!” said Hagrid fiercely. “It’s bad enough without 
you lot in trouble an’ all!” 

They had no choice. As Hermione threw the cloak 
over Harry and Ron, they heard voices at the front of 
the cabin. Hagrid looked at the place where they had 
just vanished from sight. 

“Go quick,” he said hoarsely. “Don’ listen. ...” 

And he strode back into his cabin as someone 
knocked at the front door. 

Slowly, in a kind of horrified trance, Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione set off silently around Hagrid’s house. As 
they reached the other side, the front door closed with 
a sharp snap. 

“Please, let’s hurry,” Hermione whispered. “I can’t 
stand it, I can’t bear it. ...” 

They started up the sloping lawn toward the castle. 
The sun was sinking fast now; the sky had turned to 
a clear, purple-tinged grey, but to the west there was 
a ruby-red glow. 

Ron stopped dead. 

Page | 368 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Oh, please, Ron,” Hermione began. 

“It’s Scabbers — he won’t — stay put — ” 

Ron was bent over, trying to keep Scabbers in his 
pocket, but the rat was going berserk; squeaking 
madly, twisting and flailing, trying to sink his teeth 
into Ron’s hand. 

“Scabbers, it’s me, you idiot, it’s Ron,” Ron hissed. 

They heard a door open behind them and men’s 
voices. 

“Oh, Ron, please let’s move, they’re going to do it!” 
Hermione breathed. 

“Okay — Scabbers, stay put — ” 

They walked forward; Harry, like Hermione, was 
trying not to listen to the rumble of voices behind 
them. Ron stopped again. 

“I can’t hold him — Scabbers, shut up, everyone’ll 
hear us — ” 

The rat was squealing wildly, but not loudly enough 
to cover up the sounds drifting from Hagrid’s garden. 
There was a jumble of indistinct male voices, a 
silence, and then, without warning, the unmistakable 
swish and thud of an axe. 

Hermione swayed on the spot. 

“They did it!” she whispered to Harry. “I d — don’t 
believe it — they did it!” 



Page | 369 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






CAT, RAT, AND DOG 



Harry’s mind had gone blank with shock. The three of 
them stood transfixed with horror under the 
Invisibility Cloak. The very last rays of the setting sun 
were casting a bloody light over the long-shadowed 
grounds. Then, behind them, they heard a wild 
howling. 

“Hagrid,” Harry muttered. Without thinking about 
what he was doing, he made to turn back, but both 
Ron and Hermione seized his arms. 

“We can’t,” said Ron, who was paper-white. “He’ll be 
in worse trouble if they know we’ve been to see him. 



Hermione ’s breathing was shallow and uneven. 

“How — could — they?” she choked. “How could 
they?” 

“Come on,” said Ron, whose teeth seemed to be 
chattering. 

Page | 370 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



They set off back toward the castle, walking slowly to 
keep themselves hidden under the cloak. The light 
was fading fast now. By the time they reached open 
ground, darkness was settling like a spell around 
them. 

“Scabbers, keep still,” Ron hissed, clamping his hand 
over his chest. The rat was wriggling madly. Ron 
came to a sudden halt, trying to force Scabbers 
deeper into his pocket. “What’s the matter with you, 
you stupid rat? Stay still — OUCH! He bit me!” 

“Ron, be quiet!” Hermione whispered urgently. 
“Fudge’ll be out here in a minute — ” 

“He won’t — stay — put — ” 

Scabbers was plainly terrified. He was writhing with 
all his might, trying to break free of Ron’s grip. 

“What’s the matter with him?” 

But Harry had just seen — slinking toward them, his 
body low to the ground, wide yellow eyes glinting 
eerily in the darkness — Crookshanks. Whether he 
could see them or was following the sound of 
Scabbers’s squeaks, Harry couldn’t tell. 

“Crookshanks!” Hermione moaned. “No, go away, 
Crookshanks! Go away!” 

But the cat was getting nearer — 

“Scabbers — NO!” 

Too late — the rat had slipped between Ron’s 
clutching fingers, hit the ground, and scampered 
away. In one bound, Crookshanks sprang after him, 
and before Harry or Hermione could stop him, Ron 

Page | 371 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




had thrown the Invisibility Cloak off himself and 
pelted away into the darkness. 



“Ron\” Hermione moaned. 

She and Harry looked at each other, then followed at 
a sprint; it was impossible to run full out under the 
cloak; they pulled it off and it streamed behind them 
like a banner as they hurtled after Ron; they could 
hear his feet thundering along ahead and his shouts 
at Crookshanks. 

“Get away from him — get away — Scabbers, come 
here — ” 

There was a loud thud. 

“Gotchal Get off, you stinking cat — ” 

Harry and Hermione almost fell over Ron; they 
skidded to a stop right in front of him. He was 
sprawled on the ground, but Scabbers was back in 
his pocket; he had both hands held tight over the 
quivering lump. 

“Ron — come on — back under the cloak — ” 

Hermione panted. “Dumbledore — the Minister — 
they’ll be coming back out in a minute — ” 

But before they could cover themselves again, before 
they could even catch their breath, they heard the 
soft pounding of gigantic paws. ... Something was 
bounding toward them, quiet as a shadow — an 
enormous, pale-eyed, jet-black dog. 

Harry reached for his wand, but too late — the dog 
had made an enormous leap and the front paws hit 
him on the chest; he keeled over backward in a whirl 
of hair; he felt its hot breath, saw inch-long teeth — 

Page | 372 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




But the force of its leap had carried it too far; it rolled 
off him. Dazed, feeling as though his ribs were 
broken, Harry tried to stand up; he could hear it 
growling as it skidded around for a new attack. 

Ron was on his feet. As the dog sprang back toward 
them he pushed Harry aside; the dog’s jaws fastened 
instead around Ron’s outstretched arm. Harry lunged 
forward, he seized a handful of the brute’s hair, but it 
was dragging Ron away as easily as though he were a 
rag doll — 

Then, out of nowhere, something hit Harry so hard 
across the face he was knocked off his feet again. He 
heard Hermione shriek with pain and fall too. 

Harry groped for his wand, blinking blood out of his 
eyes — 

“Lumos\” he whispered. 

The wandlight showed him the trunk of a thick tree; 
they had chased Scabbers into the shadow of the 
Whomping Willow and its branches were creaking as 
though in a high wind, whipping backward and 
forward to stop them going nearer. 

And there, at the base of the trunk, was the dog, 
dragging Ron backward into a large gap in the roots 
— Ron was fighting furiously, but his head and torso 
were slipping out of sight — 

“Ron!” Harry shouted, trying to follow, but a heavy 
branch whipped lethally through the air and he was 
forced backward again. 

All they could see now was one of Ron’s legs, which 
he had hooked around a root in an effort to stop the 
dog from pulling him farther underground — but a 

Page | 373 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




horrible crack cut the air like a gunshot; Ron’s leg 
had broken, and a moment later, his foot vanished 
from sight. 

“Harry — we’ve got to go for help — ” Hermione 
gasped; she was bleeding too; the Willow had cut her 
across the shoulder. 

“No! That thing’s big enough to eat him; we haven’t 
got time — ” 

“Harry — we’re never going to get through without 
help — ” 

Another branch whipped down at them, twigs 
clenched like knuckles. 

“If that dog can get in, we can,” Harry panted, darting 
here and there, trying to find a way through the 
vicious, swishing branches, but he couldn’t get an 
inch nearer to the tree roots without being in range of 
the tree’s blows. 

“Oh, help, help,” Hermione whispered frantically, 
dancing uncertainly on the spot, “please ...” 

Crookshanks darted forward. He slithered between 
the battering branches like a snake and placed his 
front paws upon a knot on the trunk. 

Abruptly, as though the tree had been turned to 
marble, it stopped moving. Not a leaf twitched or 
shook. 

“Crookshanks!” Hermione whispered uncertainly. She 
now grasped Harry’s arm painfully hard. “How did he 
know — ?” 



Page | 374 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“He’s friends with that dog,” said Harry grimly. “I’ve 
seen them together. Come on — and keep your wand 
out — ” 

They covered the distance to the trunk in seconds, 
but before they had reached the gap in the roots, 
Crookshanks had slid into it with a flick of his 
bottlebrush tail. Harry went next; he crawled forward, 
headfirst, and slid down an earthy slope to the 
bottom of a very low tunnel. Crookshanks was a little 
way along, his eyes flashing in the light from Harry’s 
wand. Seconds later, Hermione slithered down beside 
him. 

“Where’s Ron?” she whispered in a terrified voice. 

“This way,” said Harry, setting off, bent-backed, after 
Crookshanks. 

“Where does this tunnel come out?” Hermione asked 
breathlessly from behind him. 

“I don’t know. ... It’s marked on the Marauder’s Map 
but Fred and George said no one’s ever gotten into it. 
...It goes off the edge of the map, but it looked like it 
was heading for Hogsmeade. ...” 

They moved as fast as they could, bent almost double; 
ahead of them, Crookshanks ’s tail bobbed in and out 
of view. On and on went the passage; it felt at least as 
long as the one to Honeydukes. ... All Harry could 
think of was Ron and what the enormous dog might 
be doing to him. ... He was drawing breath in sharp, 
painful gasps, running at a crouch. ... 

And then the tunnel began to rise; moments later it 
twisted, and Crookshanks had gone. Instead, Harry 
could see a patch of dim light through a small 
opening. 

Page | 375 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He and Hermione paused, gasping for breath, edging 
forward. Both raised their wands to see what lay 
beyond. 

It was a room, a very disordered, dusty room. Paper 
was peeling from the walls; there were stains all over 
the floor; every piece of furniture was broken as 
though somebody had smashed it. The windows were 
all boarded up. 

Harry glanced at Hermione, who looked very 
frightened but nodded. 

Harry pulled himself out of the hole, staring around. 
The room was deserted, but a door to their right stood 
open, leading to a shadowy hallway. Hermione 
suddenly grabbed Harry’s arm again. Her wide eyes 
were traveling around the boarded windows. 

“Harry,” she whispered, “I think we’re in the Shrieking 
Shack.” 

Harry looked around. His eyes fell on a wooden chair 
near them. Large chunks had been torn out of it; one 
of the legs had been ripped off entirely. 

“Ghosts didn’t do that,” he said slowly. 

At that moment, there was a creak overhead. 
Something had moved upstairs. Both of them looked 
up at the ceiling. Hermione ’s grip on Harry’s arm was 
so tight he was losing feeling in his fingers. He raised 
his eyebrows at her; she nodded again and let go. 

Quietly as they could, they crept out into the hall and 
up the crumbling staircase. Everything was covered 
in a thick layer of dust except the floor, where a wide 
shiny stripe had been made by something being 
dragged upstairs. 

Page | 376 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




They reached the dark landing. 



“Nox,” they whispered together, and the lights at the 
end of their wands went out. Only one door was open. 
As they crept toward it, they heard movement from 
behind it; a low moan, and then a deep, loud purring. 
They exchanged a last look, a last nod. 

Wand held tightly before him, Harry kicked the door 
wide open. 

On a magnificent four-poster bed with dusty hangings 
lay Crookshanks, purring loudly at the sight of them. 
On the floor beside him, clutching his leg, which 
stuck out at a strange angle, was Ron. 

Harry and Hermione dashed across to him. 

“Ron — are you okay?” 

“Where’s the dog?” 

“Not a dog,” Ron moaned. His teeth were gritted with 
pain. “Harry, it’s a trap — ” 

“What — ” 

“He’s the dog ... he’s an Animagus. ...” 

Ron was staring over Harry’s shoulder. Harry wheeled 
around. With a snap, the man in the shadows closed 
the door behind them. 

A mass of filthy, matted hair hung to his elbows. If 
eyes hadn’t been shining out of the deep, dark 
sockets, he might have been a corpse. The waxy skin 
was stretched so tightly over the bones of his face, it 
looked like a skull. His yellow teeth were bared in a 
grin. It was Sirius Black. 

Page | 377 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ ExpelliarmusV’ he croaked, pointing Ron’s wand at 
them. 

Harry’s and Hermione’s wands shot out of their 
hands, high in the air, and Black caught them. Then 
he took a step closer. His eyes were fixed on Harry. 

“I thought you’d come and help your friend,” he said 
hoarsely. His voice sounded as though he had long 
since lost the habit of using it. “Your father would 
have done the same for me. Brave of you, not to run 
for a teacher. I’m grateful ... it will make everything 
much easier. ...” 

The taunt about his father rang in Harry’s ears as 
though Black had bellowed it. A boiling hate erupted 
in Harry’s chest, leaving no place for fear. For the first 
time in his life, he wanted his wand back in his hand, 
not to defend himself, but to attack ... to kill. Without 
knowing what he was doing, he started forward, but 
there was a sudden movement on either side of him 
and two pairs of hands grabbed him and held him 
back. ... “No, Harry!” Hermione gasped in a petrified 
whisper; Ron, however, spoke to Black. 

“If you want to kill Harry, you’ll have to kill us too!” 
he said fiercely, though the effort of standing upright 
was draining him of still more color, and he swayed 
slightly as he spoke. 

Something flickered in Black’s shadowed eyes. 

“Lie down,” he said quietly to Ron. “You will damage 
that leg even more.” 

“Did you hear me?” Ron said weakly, though he was 
clinging painfully to Harry to stay upright. “You’ll 
have to kill all three of us!” 



Page | 378 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“There’ll be only one murder here tonight,” said Black, 
and his grin widened. 



“Why’s that?” Harry spat, trying to wrench himself 
free of Ron and Hermione. “Didn’t care last time, did 
you? Didn’t mind slaughtering all those Muggles to 
get at Pettigrew. ... What’s the matter, gone soft in 
Azkaban?” 

“Harry!” Hermione whimpered. “Be quiet!” 

“HE KILLED MY MUM AND DAD!” Harry roared, and 
with a huge effort he broke free of Hermione ’s and 
Ron’s restraint and lunged forward — 

He had forgotten about magic — he had forgotten that 
he was short and skinny and thirteen, whereas Black 
was a tall, full-grown man — all Harry knew was that 
he wanted to hurt Black as badly as he could and 
that he didn’t care how much he got hurt in return — 

Perhaps it was the shock of Harry doing something so 
stupid, but Black didn’t raise the wands in time — 
one of Harry’s hands fastened over his wasted wrist, 
forcing the wand tips away; the knuckles of Harry’s 
other hand collided with the side of Black’s head and 
they fell, backward, into the wall — 

Hermione was screaming; Ron was yelling; there was 
a blinding flash as the wands in Black’s hand sent a 
jet of sparks into the air that missed Harry’s face by 
inches; Harry felt the shrunken arm under his fingers 
twisting madly, but he clung on, his other hand 
punching every part of Black it could find. 

But Black’s free hand had found Harry’s throat — 

“No,” he hissed, “I’ve waited too long — ” 

Page | 379 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The fingers tightened, Harry choked, his glasses 
askew. 

Then he saw Hermione ’s foot swing out of nowhere. 
Black let go of Harry with a grunt of pain; Ron had 
thrown himself on Black’s wand hand and Harry 
heard a faint clatter — 

He fought free of the tangle of bodies and saw his own 
wand rolling across the floor; he threw himself toward 
it but — 

“Argh!” 

Crookshanks had joined the fray; both sets of front 
claws had sunk themselves deep into Harry’s arm; 
Harry threw him off, but Crookshanks now darted 
toward Harry’s wand — 

“NO YOU DONT!” roared Harry, and he aimed a kick 
at Crookshanks that made the cat leap aside, 
spitting; Harry snatched up his wand and turned — 

“Get out of the way!” he shouted at Ron and 
Hermione. 

They didn’t need telling twice. Hermione, gasping for 
breath, her lip bleeding, scrambled aside, snatching 
up her and Ron’s wands. Ron crawled to the four- 
poster and collapsed onto it, panting, his white face 
now tinged with green, both hands clutching his 
broken leg. 

Black was sprawled at the bottom of the wall. His thin 
chest rose and fell rapidly as he watched Harry 
walking slowly nearer, his wand pointing straight at 
Black’s heart. 

“Going to kill me, Harry?” he whispered. 

Page | 380 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry stopped right above him, his wand still pointing 
at Black’s chest, looking down at him. A livid bruise 
was rising around Black’s left eye and his nose was 
bleeding. 

“You killed my parents,” said Harry, his voice shaking 
slightly, but his wand hand quite steady. 

Black stared up at him out of those sunken eyes. 

“I don’t deny it,” he said very quietly. “But if you knew 
the whole story.” 

“The whole story?” Harry repeated, a furious 
pounding in his ears. “You sold them to Voldemort. 
That’s all I need to know.” 

“You’ve got to listen to me,” Black said, and there was 
a note of urgency in his voice now. “You’ll regret it if 
you don’t. ... You don’t understand. ...” 

“I understand a lot better than you think,” said Harry, 
and his voice shook more than ever. “You never heard 
her, did you? My mum ... trying to stop Voldemort 
killing me ... and you did that ... you did it. ...” 

Before either of them could say another word, 
something ginger streaked past Harry; Crookshanks 
leapt onto Black’s chest and settled himself there, 
right over Black’s heart. Black blinked and looked 
down at the cat. 

“Get off,” he murmured, trying to push Crookshanks 
off him. 

But Crookshanks sank his claws into Black’s robes 
and wouldn’t shift. He turned his ugly, squashed face 
to Harry and looked up at him with those great yellow 
eyes. To his right, Hermione gave a dry sob. 

Page | 381 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry stared down at Black and Crookshanks, his 
grip tightening on the wand. So what if he had to kill 
the cat too? It was in league with Black. ... If it was 
prepared to die, trying to protect Black, that wasn’t 
Harry’s business. ... If Black wanted to save it, that 
only proved he cared more for Crookshanks than for 
Harry’s parents. ... 

Harry raised the wand. Now was the moment to do it. 
Now was the moment to avenge his mother and 
father. He was going to kill Black. He had to kill 
Black. This was his chance. ... 

The seconds lengthened. And still Harry stood frozen 
there, wand poised, Black staring up at him, 
Crookshanks on his chest. Ron’s ragged breathing 
came from near the bed; Hermione was quite silent. 

And then came a new sound — 

Muffled footsteps were echoing up through the floor 
— someone was moving downstairs. 

“WE’RE UP HERE!” Hermione screamed suddenly. 
“WE’RE UP HERE — SIRIUS BLACK — QUICK!” 

Black made a startled movement that almost 
dislodged Crookshanks; Harry gripped his wand 
convulsively — Do it nouA said a voice in his head — 
but the footsteps were thundering up the stairs and 
Harry still hadn’t done it. 

The door of the room burst open in a shower of red 
sparks and Harry wheeled around as Professor Lupin 
came hurtling into the room, his face bloodless, his 
wand raised and ready. His eyes flickered over Ron, 
lying on the floor, over Hermione, cowering next to the 
door, to Harry, standing there with his wand covering 



Page | 382 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Black, and then to Black himself, crumpled and 
bleeding at Harry’s feet. 

“ ExpelliarmusV’ Lupin shouted. 

Harry’s wand flew once more out of his hand; so did 
the two Hermione was holding. Lupin caught them all 
deftly, then moved into the room, staring at Black, 
who still had Crookshanks lying protectively across 
his chest. 

Harry stood there, feeling suddenly empty. He hadn’t 
done it. His nerve had failed him. Black was going to 
be handed back to the dementors. 

Then Lupin spoke, in a very tense voice. 

“Where is he, Sirius?” 

Harry looked quickly at Lupin. He didn’t understand 
what Lupin meant. Who was Lupin talking about? He 
turned to look at Black again. 

Black’s face was quite expressionless. For a few 
seconds, he didn’t move at all. Then, very slowly, he 
raised his empty hand and pointed straight at Ron. 
Mystified, Harry glanced around at Ron, who looked 
bewildered. 

“But then ... ,” Lupin muttered, staring at Black so 
intently it seemed he was trying to read his mind, "... 
why hasn’t he shown himself before now? Unless” — 
Lupin’s eyes suddenly widened, as though he was 
seeing something beyond Black, something none of 
the rest could see, “ — unless he was the one ... 
unless you switched . . . without telling me?” 

Very slowly, his sunken gaze never leaving Lupin’s 
face, Black nodded. 

Page | 383 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Professor,” Harry interrupted loudly, “what’s going 
on — ?” 

But he never finished the question, because what he 
saw made his voice die in his throat. Lupin was 
lowering his wand, gazing fixedly at Black. The 
Professor walked to Black’s side, seized his hand, 
pulled him to his feet so that Crookshanks fell to the 
floor, and embraced Black like a brother. 

Harry felt as though the bottom had dropped out of 
his stomach. 

“I DONT BELIEVE IT!” Hermione screamed. 

Lupin let go of Black and turned to her. She had 
raised herself off the floor and was pointing at Lupin, 
wild-eyed. “You — you — ” 

“Hermione — ” 

“ — you and him!” 

“Hermione, calm down — ” 

“I didn’t tell anyone!” Hermione shrieked. “I’ve been 
covering up for you — ” 

“Hermione, listen to me, please!” Lupin shouted. “I 
can explain — ” 

Harry could feel himself shaking, not with fear, but 
with a fresh wave of fury. 

“I trusted you,” he shouted at Lupin, his voice 
wavering out of control, “and all the time you’ve been 
his friend!” 



Page | 384 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You’re wrong,” said Lupin. “I haven’t been Sirius’s 
friend, but I am now — Let me explain. ...” 

“NO!” Hermione screamed. “Harry, don’t trust him, 
he’s been helping Black get into the castle, he wants 
you dead too — he’s a werewolf.” 

There was a ringing silence. Everyone’s eyes were now 
on Lupin, who looked remarkably calm, though rather 
pale. 

“Not at all up to your usual standard, Hermione,” he 
said. “Only one out of three, I’m afraid. I have not 
been helping Sirius get into the castle and I certainly 
don’t want Harry dead. ...” An odd shiver passed over 
his face. “But I won’t deny that I am a werewolf.” 

Ron made a valiant effort to get up again but fell back 
with a whimper of pain. Lupin made toward him, 
looking concerned, but Ron gasped, 

“Get away from me, werewolf” 

Lupin stopped dead. Then, with an obvious effort, he 
turned to Hermione and said, “How long have you 
known?” 

“Ages,” Hermione whispered. “Since I did Professor 
Snape’s essay. ...” 

“He’ll be delighted,” said Lupin coolly. “He assigned 
that essay hoping someone would realize what my 
symptoms meant. ... Did you check the lunar chart 
and realize that I was always ill at the full moon? Or 
did you realize that the boggart changed into the 
moon when it saw me?” 

“Both,” Hermione said quietly. 



Page | 385 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Lupin forced a laugh. 

“You’re the cleverest witch of your age I’ve ever met, 
Hermione.” 

“I’m not,” Hermione whispered. “If I’d been a bit 
cleverer, I’d have told everyone what you are!” 

“But they already know,” said Lupin. “At least, the 
staff do.” 

“Dumbledore hired you when he knew you were a 
werewolf?” Ron gasped. “Is he mad?” 

“Some of the staff thought so,” said Lupin. “He had to 
work very hard to convince certain teachers that I’m 
trustworthy — ” 

“AND HE WAS WRONG!” Harry yelled. “YOU VE BEEN 
HELPING HIM ALL THE TIME!” He was pointing at 
Black, who suddenly crossed to the four-poster bed 
and sank onto it, his face hidden in one shaking 
hand. Crookshanks leapt up beside him and stepped 
onto his lap, purring. Ron edged away from both of 
them, dragging his leg. 

“I have not been helping Sirius,” said Lupin. “If you’ll 
give me a chance, I’ll explain. Look — ” 

He separated Harry’s, Ron’s and Hermione’s wands 
and threw each back to its owner; Harry caught his, 
stunned. 

“There,” said Lupin, sticking his own wand back into 
his belt. “You’re armed, we’re not. Now will you 
listen?” 

Harry didn’t know what to think. Was it a trick? 



Page | 386 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“If you haven’t been helping him,” he said, with a 
furious glance at Black, “how did you know he was 
here?” 



“The map,” said Lupin. “The Marauder’s Map. I was in 
my office examining it — ” 

“You know how to work it?” Harry said suspiciously. 

“Of course I know how to work it,” said Lupin, waving 
his hand impatiently. “I helped write it. I’m Moony — 
that was my friends’ nickname for me at school.” 

“You wrote — ?” 

“The important thing is, I was watching it carefully 
this evening, because I had an idea that you, Ron, 
and Hermione might try and sneak out of the castle to 
visit Hagrid before his hippogriff was executed. And I 
was right, wasn’t I?” 

He had started to pace up and down, looking at them. 
Little patches of dust rose at his feet. 

“You might have been wearing your father’s old cloak, 
Harry — ” 

“How d’you know about the cloak?” 

“The number of times I saw James disappearing 
under it... ,” said Lupin, waving an impatient hand 
again. “The point is, even if you’re wearing an 
Invisibility Cloak, you still show up on the Marauder’s 
Map. I watched you cross the grounds and enter 
Hagrid’s hut. Twenty minutes later, you left Hagrid, 
and set off back toward the castle. But you were now 
accompanied by somebody else.” 

“What?” said Harry. “No, we weren’t!” 

Page | 387 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I couldn’t believe my eyes,” said Lupin, still pacing, 
and ignoring Harry’s interruption. “I thought the map 
must be malfunctioning. How could he be with you?” 

“No one was with us!” said Harry. 

“And then I saw another dot, moving fast toward you, 
labeled Sirius Black. ... I saw him collide with you; I 
watched as he pulled two of you into the Whomping 
Willow — ” 

“One of us!” Ron said angrily. 

“No, Ron,” said Lupin. “Two of you.” 

He had stopped his pacing, his eyes moving over Ron. 

“Do you think I could have a look at the rat?” he said 
evenly. 

“What?” said Ron. “What’s Scabbers got to do with 
it?” 



“Everything,” said Lupin. “Could I see him, please?” 

Ron hesitated, then put a hand inside his robes. 
Scabbers emerged, thrashing desperately; Ron had to 
seize his long bald tail to stop him escaping. 
Crookshanks stood up on Black’s leg and made a soft 
hissing noise. 

Lupin moved closer to Ron. He seemed to be holding 
his breath as he gazed intently at Scabbers. 

“What?” Ron said again, holding Scabbers close to 
him, looking scared. “What’s my rat got to do with 
anything?” 

“That’s not a rat,” croaked Sirius Black suddenly. 

Page | 388 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“What d’you mean — of course he’s a rat — ” 

“No, he’s not,” said Lupin quietly. “He’s a wizard.” 

“An Animagus,” said Black, “by the name of Peter 
Pettigrew.” 



Page | 389 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






MOONY, WORMTAIL, PADFOOT, AND 

PRONGS 

It took a few seconds for the absurdity of this 
statement to sink in. Then Ron voiced what Harry 
was thinking. 

“You’re both mental.” 

“Ridiculous!” said Hermione faintly. 

“Peter Pettigrew’s dead!” said Harry. “He killed him 
twelve years ago!” He pointed at Black, whose face 
twitched convulsively. 

“I meant to,” he growled, his yellow teeth bared, “but 
little Peter got the better of me ... not this time, 
though!” 

And Crookshanks was thrown to the floor as Black 
lunged at Scabbers; Ron yelled with pain as Black’s 
weight fell on his broken leg. 



Page | 390 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Sirius, NO!” Lupin yelled, launching himself forwards 
and dragging Black away from Ron again, “WAIT! You 
can’t do it just like that — they need to understand — 
we’ve got to explain — ” 

“We can explain afterwards!” snarled Black, trying to 
throw Lupin off. One hand was still clawing the air as 
it tried to reach Scabbers, who was squealing like a 
piglet, scratching Ron’s face and neck as he tried to 
escape. 

“They’ve — got — a — right — to — know — 
everything!” Lupin panted, still trying to restrain 
Black. “Ron’s kept him as a pet! There are parts of it 
even I don’t understand! And Harry — you owe Harry 
the truth, Sirius!” 

Black stopped struggling, though his hollowed eyes 
were still fixed on Scabbers, who was clamped tightly 
under Ron’s bitten, scratched, and bleeding hands. 

“All right, then,” Black said, without taking his eyes 
off the rat. “Tell them whatever you like. But make it 
quick, Remus. I want to commit the murder I was 
imprisoned for. ...” 

“You’re nutters, both of you,” said Ron shakily, 
looking round at Harry and Hermione for support. 

“I’ve had enough of this. I’m off.” 

He tried to heave himself up on his good leg, but 
Lupin raised his wand again, pointing it at Scabbers. 

“You’re going to hear me out, Ron,” he said quietly. 
“Just keep a tight hold on Peter while you listen.” 

“HE’S NOT PETER, HE’S SCABBERS!” Ron yelled, 
trying to force the rat back into his front pocket, but 
Scabbers was fighting too hard; Ron swayed and 

Page | 391 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




overbalanced, and Harry caught him and pushed him 
back down to the bed. Then, ignoring Black, Harry 
turned to Lupin. 

“There were witnesses who saw Pettigrew die,” he 
said. “A whole street full of them ...” 

“They didn’t see what they thought they saw!” said 
Black savagely, still watching Scabbers struggling in 
Ron’s hands. 

“Everyone thought Sirius killed Peter,” said Lupin, 
nodding. “I believed it myself — until I saw the map 
tonight. Because the Marauder’s map never lies ... 
Peter’s alive. Ron’s holding him, Harry.” 

Harry looked down at Ron, and as their eyes met, 
they agreed, silently: Black and Lupin were both out 
of their minds. Their story made no sense whatsoever. 
How could Scabbers be Peter Pettigrew? Azkaban 
must have unhinged Black after all — but why was 
Lupin playing along with him? 

Then Hermione spoke, in a trembling, would-be calm 
sort of voice, as though trying to will Professor Lupin 
to talk sensibly. 

“But Professor Lupin ... Scabbers can’t be Pettigrew 
... it just can’t be true, you know it can’t ...” 

“Why can’t it be true?” Lupin said calmly, as though 
they were in class, and Hermione had simply spotted 
a problem in an experiment with grindylows. 

“Because . . . because people would know if Peter 
Pettigrew had been an Animagus. We did Animagi in 
class with Professor McGonagall. And I looked them 
up when I did my homework — the Ministry of Magic 
keeps tabs on witches and wizards who can become 
Page | 392 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




animals; there’s a register showing what animal they 
become, and their markings and things ... and I went 
and looked Professor McGonagall up on the register, 
and there have been only seven Animagi this century, 
and Pettigrew’s name wasn’t on the list — ” 

Harry had barely had time to marvel inwardly at the 
effort Hermione put into her homework, when Lupin 
started to laugh. “Right again, Hermione!” he said. 
“But the Ministry never knew that there used to be 
three unregistered Animagi running around 
Hogwarts.” 

“If you’re going to tell them the story, get a move on, 
Remus,” snarled Black, who was still watching 
Scabbers’s every desperate move. “I’ve waited twelve 
years, I’m not going to wait much longer.” 

“All right ... but you’ll need to help me, Sirius,” said 
Lupin, “I only know how it began ...” 

Lupin broke off. There had been a loud creak behind 
him. The bedroom door had opened of its own accord. 
All five of them stared at it. Then Lupin strode toward 
it and looked out into the landing. 

“No one there ...” 

“This place is haunted!” said Ron. 

“It’s not,” said Lupin, still looking at the door in a 
puzzled way. “The Shrieking Shack was never 
haunted. ... The screams and howls the villagers used 
to hear were made by me.” 

He pushed his graying hair out of his eyes, thought 
for a moment, then said, “That’s where all of this 
starts — with my becoming a werewolf. None of this 



Page | 393 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




could have happened if I hadn’t been bitten ... and if I 
hadn’t been so foolhardy. ...” 

He looked sober and tired. Ron started to interrupt, 
but Hermione said, “Shh!” She was watching Lupin 
very intently. 

“I was a very small boy when I received the bite. My 
parents tried everything, but in those days there was 
no cure. The potion that Professor Snape has been 
making for me is a very recent discovery. It makes me 
safe, you see. As long as I take it in the week 
preceding the full moon, I keep my mind when I 
transform. ... I am able to curl up in my office, a 
harmless wolf, and wait for the moon to wane again. 

“Before the Wolfsbane Potion was discovered, 
however, I became a fully fledged monster once a 
month. It seemed impossible that I would be able to 
come to Hogwarts. Other parents weren’t likely to 
want their children exposed to me. 

“But then Dumbledore became Headmaster, and he 
was sympathetic. He said that as long as we took 
certain precautions, there was no reason I shouldn’t 
come to school. ...” Lupin sighed, and looked directly 
at Harry. “I told you, months ago, that the Whomping 
Willow was planted the year I came to Hogwarts. The 
truth is that it was planted because I came to 
Hogwarts. This house” — Lupin looked miserably 
around the room, — “the tunnel that leads to it — 
they were built for my use. Once a month, I was 
smuggled out of the castle, into this place, to 
transform. The tree was placed at the tunnel mouth 
to stop anyone coming across me while I was 
dangerous.” 

Harry couldn’t see where this story was going, but he 
was listening raptly all the same. The only sound 

Page | 394 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




apart from Lupin’s voice was Scabbers’s frightened 
squeaking. 



“My transformations in those days were — were 
terrible. It is very painful to turn into a werewolf. I 
was separated from humans to bite, so I bit and 
scratched myself instead. The villagers heard the 
noise and the screaming and thought they were 
hearing particularly violent spirits. Dumbledore 
encouraged the rumor. . . . Even now, when the house 
has been silent for years, the villagers don’t dare 
approach it. ... 

“But apart from my transformations, I was happier 
than I had ever been in my life. For the first time ever, 
I had friends, three great friends. Sirius Black ... 

Peter Pettigrew ... and, of course, your father, Harry 
— James Potter. 

“Now, my three friends could hardly fail to notice that 
I disappeared once a month. I made up all sorts of 
stories. I told them my mother was ill, and that I had 
to go home to see her. ... I was terrified they would 
desert me the moment they found out what I was. But 
of course, they, like you, Hermione, worked out the 
truth. ... 

“And they didn’t desert me at all. Instead, they did 
something for me that would make my 
transformations not only bearable, but the best times 
of my life. They became Animagi.” 

“My dad too?” said Harry, astounded. 

“Yes, indeed,” said Lupin. “It took them the best part 
of three years to work out how to do it. Your father 
and Sirius here were the cleverest students in the 
school, and lucky they were, because the Animagus 
transformation can go horribly wrong — one reason 
Page | 395 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




the Ministry keeps a close watch on those attempting 
to do it. Peter needed all the help he could get from 
James and Sirius. Finally, in our fifth year, they 
managed it. They could each turn into a different 
animal at will.” 

“But how did that help you?” said Hermione, 
sounding puzzled. 

“They couldn’t keep me company as humans, so they 
kept me company as animals,” said Lupin. “A 
werewolf is only a danger to people. They sneaked out 
of the castle every month under James’s Invisibility 
Cloak. They transformed . . . Peter, as the smallest, 
could slip beneath the Willow’s attacking branches 
and touch the knot that freezes it. They would then 
slip down the tunnel and join me. Under their 
influence, I became less dangerous. My body was still 
wolfish, but my mind seemed to become less so while 
I was with them.” 

“Hurry up, Remus,” snarled Black, who was still 
watching Scabbers with a horrible sort of hunger on 
his face. 

“I’m getting there, Sirius, I’m getting there ... well, 
highly exciting possibilities were open to us now that 
we could all transform. Soon we were leaving the 
Shrieking Shack and roaming the school grounds and 
the village by night. Sirius and James transformed 
into such large animals, they were able to keep a 
werewolf in check. I doubt whether any Hogwarts 
students ever found out more about the Hogwarts 
grounds and Hogsmeade than we did. ... And that’s 
how we came to write the Marauder’s Map, and sign it 
with our nicknames. Sirius is Padfoot. Peter is 
Wormtail. James was Prongs.” 



Page | 396 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“What sort of animal — ?” Harry began, but Hermione 
cut him off. 

“That was still really dangerous! Running around in 
the dark with a werewolf! What if you’d given the 
others the slip, and bitten somebody?” 

“A thought that still haunts me,” said Lupin heavily. 
“And there were near misses, many of them. We 
laughed about them afterwards. We were young, 
thoughtless — carried away with our own cleverness.” 

“I sometimes felt guilty about betraying Dumbledore’s 
trust, of course ... he had admitted me to Hogwarts 
when no other headmaster would have done so, and 
he had no idea I was breaking the rules he had set 
down for my own and others’ safety. He never knew I 
had led three fellow students into becoming Animagi 
illegally. But I always managed to forget my guilty 
feelings every time we sat down to plan our next 
month’s adventure. And I haven’t changed ...” 

Lupin’s face had hardened, and there was self-disgust 
in his voice. “All this year, I have been battling with 
myself, wondering whether I should tell Dumbledore 
that Sirius was an Animagus. But I didn’t do it. Why? 
Because I was too cowardly. It would have meant 
admitting that I’d betrayed his trust while I was at 
school, admitting that I’d led others along with me ... 
and Dumbledore’s trust has meant everything to me. 
He let me into Hogwarts as a boy, and he gave me a 
job when I have been shunned all my adult life, 
unable to find paid work because of what I am. And 
so I convinced myself that Sirius was getting into the 
school using dark arts he learned from Voldemort, 
that being an Animagus had nothing to do with it . . . 
so, in a way, Snape’s been right about me all along.” 



Page | 397 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Snape?” said Black harshly, taking his eyes off 
Scabbers for the first time in minutes and looking up 
at Lupin. “What’s Snape got to do with it?” 

“He’s here, Sirius,” said Lupin heavily. “He’s teaching 
here as well.” He looked up at Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione. 

“Professor Snape was at school with us. He fought 
very hard against my appointment to the Defense 
Against the Dark Arts job. He has been telling 
Dumbledore all year that I am not to be trusted. He 
has his reasons ... you see, Sirius here played a trick 
on him which nearly killed him, a trick which 
involved me — ” 

Black made a derisive noise. 

“It served him right,” he sneered. “Sneaking around, 
trying to find out what we were up to . . . hoping he 
could get us expelled. ...” 

“Severus was very interested in where I went every 
month.” Lupin told Harry, Ron, and Hermione. “We 
were in the same year, you know, and we — er — 
didn’t like each other very much. He especially 
disliked James. Jealous, I think, of James’s talent on 
the Quidditch field . . . anyway Snape had seen me 
crossing the grounds with Madam Pomfrey one 
evening as she led me toward the Whomping Willow 
to transform. Sirius thought it would be — er — 
amusing, to tell Snape all he had to do was prod the 
knot on the tree trunk with a long stick, and he’d be 
able to get in after me. Well, of course, Snape tried it 
— if he’d got as far as this house, he’d have met a 
fully grown werewolf — but your father, who’d heard 
what Sirius had done, went after Snape and pulled 
him back, at great risk to his life . . . Snape glimpsed 
me, though, at the end of the tunnel. He was 
Page | 398 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




forbidden by Dumbledore to tell anybody, but from 
that time on he knew what I was. ...” 

“So that’s why Snape doesn’t like you,” said Harry 
slowly, “because he thought you were in on the joke?” 

“That’s right,” sneered a cold voice from the wall 
behind Lupin. 

Severus Snape was pulling off the Invisibility Cloak, 
his wand pointing directly at Lupin. 



Page | 399 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 








THE SERVANT OF LORD 
VOLDERMORT 

Hermione screamed. Black leapt to his feet. Harry felt 
as though he’d received a huge electric shock. 

“I found this at the base of the Whomping Willow,” 
said Snape, throwing the cloak aside, careful to keep 
this wand pointing directly at Lupin’s chest. “Very 
useful, Potter, I thank you. ...” 

Snape was slightly breathless, but his face was full of 
suppressed triumph. “You’re wondering, perhaps, 
how I knew you were here?” he said, his eyes 
glittering. “I’ve just been to your office, Lupin. You 
forgot to take your potion tonight, so I took a gobletful 
along. And very lucky I did ... lucky for me, I mean. 
Lying on your desk was a certain map. One glance at 
it told me all I needed to know. I saw you running 
along this passageway and out of sight.” 

“Severus — ” Lupin began, but Snape overrode him. 



Page | 400 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



“I’ve told the headmaster again and again that you’re 
helping your old friend Black into the castle, Lupin, 
and here’s the proof. Not even I dreamed you would 
have the nerve to use this old place as your hideout 



“Severus, you’re making a mistake,” said Lupin 
urgently. “You haven’t heard everything — I can 
explain — Sirius is not here to kill Harry — ” 

“Two more for Azkaban tonight,” said Snape, his eyes 
now gleaming fanatically. “I shall be interested to see 
how Dumbledore takes this. ... He was quite 
convinced you were harmless, you know, Lupin ... a 
tame werewolf — ” 

“You fool,” said Lupin softly. “Is a schoolboy grudge 
worth putting an innocent man back inside 
Azkaban?” 

BANG! Thin, snakelike cords burst from the end of 
Snape’s wand and twisted themselves around Lupin’s 
mouth, wrists, and ankles; he overbalanced and fell 
to the floor, unable to move. With a roar of rage, 

Black started toward Snape, but Snape pointed his 
wand straight between Black’s eyes. 

“Give me a reason,” he whispered. “Give me a reason 
to do it, and I swear I will.” 

Black stopped dead. It would have been impossible to 
say which face showed more hatred. 

Harry stood there, paralyzed, not knowing what to do 
or whom to believe. He glanced around at Ron and 
Hermione. Ron looked just as confused as he did, still 
fighting to keep hold on the struggling Scabbers. 
Hermione, however, took an uncertain step toward 
Snape and said, in a very breathless voice, “Professor 
Page | 401 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Snape — it — it wouldn’t hurt to hear what they’ve 
got to say, w — would it?” 

“Miss Granger, you are already facing suspension 
from this school,” Snape spat. “You, Potter, and 
Weasley are out-of-bounds, in the company of a 
convicted murderer and a werewolf. For once in your 
life, hold your tongue.” 

“But if — if there was a mistake — ” 

“KEEP QUIET, YOU STUPID GIRL!” Snape shouted, 
looking suddenly quite deranged. “DONT TALK 
ABOUT WHAT YOU DONT UNDERSTAND!” A few 
sparks shot out of the end of his wand, which was 
still pointed at Black’s face. Hermione fell silent. 

“Vengeance is very sweet,” Snape breathed at Black. 
“How I hoped I would be the one to catch you. ...” 

“The joke’s on you again, Severus,” Black snarled. “As 
long as this boy brings his rat up to the castle” — he 
jerked his head at Ron — “I’ll come quietly. ...” 

“Up to the castle?” said Snape silkily. “I don’t think 
we need to go that far. All I have to do is call the 
dementors once we get out of the Willow. They’ll be 
very pleased to see you, Black ... pleased enough to 
give you a little kiss, I daresay. ...” 

What little color there was in Black’s face left it. 

“You — you’ve got to hear me out,” he croaked. “The 
rat — look at the rat — ” 

But there was a mad glint in Snape ’s eyes that Harry 
had never seen before. He seemed beyond reason. 



Page | 402 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Come on, all of you,” he said. He clicked his fingers, 
and the ends of the cords that bound Lupin flew to 
his hands. “Ill drag the werewolf. Perhaps the 
dementors will have a kiss for him too — ” 

Before he knew what he was doing, Harry had crossed 
the room in three strides and blocked the door. 

“Get out of the way, Potter, you’re in enough trouble 
already,” snarled Snape. “If I hadn’t been here to save 
your skin — ” 

“Professor Lupin could have killed me about a 
hundred times this year,” Harry said. “I’ve been alone 
with him loads of times, having defense lessons 
against the dementors. If he was helping Black, why 
didn’t he just finish me off then?” 

“Don’t ask me to fathom the way a werewolf’s mind 
works,” hissed Snape. “Get out of the way, Potter.” 

“YOU’RE PATHETIC!” Harry yelled. “JUST BECAUSE 
THEY MADE A FOOL OF YOU AT SCHOOL YOU 
WONT EVEN LISTEN — ” 

“SILENCE! I WILL NOT BE SPOKEN TO LIKE THAT!” 
Snape shrieked, looking madder than ever. “Like 
father, like son, Potter! I have just saved your neck; 
you should be thanking me on bended knee! You 
would have been well served if he’d killed you! You’d 
have died like your father, too arrogant to believe you 
might be mistaken in Black — now get out of the way, 
or I will make you. GET OUT OF THE WAY, POTTER!” 

Harry made up his mind in a split second. Before 
Snape could take even one step toward him, he had 
raised his wand. 



Page | 403 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ Expelliarmus\” he yelled — except that his wasn’t the 
only voice that shouted. There was a blast that made 
the door rattle on its hinges; Snape was lifted off his 
feet and slammed into the wall, then slid down it to 
the floor, a trickle of blood oozing from under his hair. 
He had been knocked out. 

Harry looked around. Both Ron and Hermione had 
tried to disarm Snape at exactly the same moment. 
Snape ’s wand soared in a high arc and landed on the 
bed next to Crookshanks. 

“You shouldn’t have done that,” said Black, looking at 
Harry. “You should have left him to me. ...” 

Harry avoided Black’s eyes. He wasn’t sure, even now, 
that he’d done the right thing. 

“We attacked a teacher. ... We attacked a teacher ... ,” 
Hermione whimpered, staring at the lifeless Snape 
with frightened eyes. “Oh, we’re going to be in so 
much trouble — ” 

Lupin was struggling against his bonds. Black bent 
down quickly and untied him. Lupin straightened up, 
rubbing his arms where the ropes had cut into them. 

“Thank you, Harry,” he said. 

“I’m still not saying I believe you,” he told Lupin. 

“Then it’s time we offered you some proof,” said 
Lupin. “You, boy — give me Peter, please. Now.” 

Ron clutched Scabbers closer to his chest. 

“Come off it,” he said weakly. “Are you trying to say 
he broke out of Azkaban just to get his hands on 
Scabbers ? I mean ...” He looked up at Harry and 

Page | 404 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione for support, “Okay, say Pettigrew could 
turn into a rat — there are millions of rats — how’s he 
supposed to know which one he’s after if he was 
locked up in Azkaban?” 

“You know, Sirius, that’s a fair question,” said Lupin, 
turning to Black and frowning slightly. “How did you 
find out where he was?” 

Black put one of his clawlike hands inside his robes 
and took out a crumpled piece of paper, which he 
smoothed flat and held out to show the others. 

It was the photograph of Ron and his family that had 
appeared in the Daily Prophet the previous summer, 
and there, on Ron’s shoulder, was Scabbers. 

“How did you get this?” Lupin asked Black, 
thunderstruck. 

“Fudge,” said Black. “When he came to inspect 
Azkaban last year, he gave me his paper. And there 
was Peter, on the front page ... on this boy’s shoulder. 
... I knew him at once . . . how many times had I seen 
him transform? And the caption said the boy would 
be going back to Hogwarts ... to where Harry was. ...” 

“My God,” said Lupin softly, staring from Scabbers to 
the picture in the paper and back again. “His front 
paw ...” 

“What about it?” said Ron defiantly. 

“He’s got a toe missing,” said Black. 

“Of course,” Lupin breathed. “So simple ... so brilliant 
... he cut it off himself?” 



Page | 405 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Just before he transformed,” said Black. “When I 
cornered him, he yelled for the whole street to hear 
that I’d betrayed Lily and James. Then, before I could 
curse him, he blew apart the street with the wand 
behind his back, killed everyone within twenty feet of 
himself — and sped down into the sewer with the 
other rats. ...” 

“Didn’t you ever hear, Ron?” said Lupin. “The biggest 
bit of Peter they found was his finger.” 

“Look, Scabbers probably had a fight with another rat 
or something! He’s been in my family for ages, right — 



“Twelve years, in fact,” said Lupin. “Didn’t you ever 
wonder why he was living so long?” 

“We — we’ve been taking good care of him!” said Ron. 

“Not looking too good at the moment, though, is he?” 
said Lupin. “I’d guess he’s been losing weight ever 
since he heard Sirius was on the loose again. ...” 

“He’s been scared of that mad cat!” said Ron, nodding 
toward Crookshanks, who was still purring on the 
bed. 

But that wasn’t right, Harry thought suddenly. ... 
Scabbers had been looking ill before he met 
Crookshanks . . . ever since Ron’s return from Egypt . . . 
since the time when Black had escaped. ... 

“This cat isn’t mad,” said Black hoarsely. He reached 
out a bony hand and stroked Crookshanks ’s fluffy 
head. “He’s the most intelligent of his kind I’ve ever 
met. He recognized Peter for what he was right away. 
And when he met me, he knew I was no dog. It was a 
while before he trusted me. ... Finally, I managed to 
Page | 406 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




communicate to him what I was after, and he’s been 
helping me. ...” 



“What do you mean?” breathed Hermione. 

“He tried to bring Peter to me, but couldn’t ... so he 
stole the passwords into Gryffindor Tower for me. ... 

As I understand it, he took them from a boy’s bedside 
table. ...” 

Harry’s brain seemed to be sagging under the weight 
of what he was hearing. It was absurd . . . and yet . . . 

“But Peter got wind of what was going on and ran for 
it. ...” croaked Black. “This cat — Crookshanks, did 
you call him? — told me Peter had left blood on the 
sheets. ... I supposed he bit himself. ... Well, faking 
his own death had worked once. ...” 

These words jolted Harry to his senses. 

“And why did he fake his death?” he said furiously. 
“Because he knew you were about to kill him like you 
killed my parents!” 

“No,” said Lupin, “Harry — ” 

“And now you’ve come to finish him off!” 

“Yes, I have,” said Black, with an evil look at 
Scabbers. 

“Then I should’ve let Snape take you!” Harry shouted. 

“Harry,” said Lupin hurriedly, “don’t you see? All this 
time we’ve thought Sirius betrayed your parents, and 
Peter tracked him down — but it was the other way 
around, don’t you see? Peter betrayed your mother 
and father — Sirius tracked Peter down — ” 

Page | 407 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“THAT’S NOT TRUE!” Harry yelled. “HE WAS THEIR 
SECRET-KEEPER! HE SAID SO BEFORE YOU 
TURNED UP. HE SAID HE KILLED THEM!” 

He was pointing at Black, who shook his head slowly; 
the sunken eyes were suddenly overbright. 

“Harry ... I as good as killed them,” he croaked. “I 
persuaded Lily and James to change to Peter at the 
last moment, persuaded them to use him as Secret- 
Keeper instead of me. ... I’m to blame, I know it. ... 
The night they died, I’d arranged to check on Peter, 
make sure he was still safe, but when I arrived at his 
hiding place, he’d gone. Yet there was no sign of a 
struggle. It didn’t feel right. I was scared. I set out for 
your parents’ house straight away. And when I saw 
their house, destroyed, and their bodies ... I realized 
what Peter must’ve done ... what I’d done. ...” 

His voice broke. He turned away. 

“Enough of this,” said Lupin, and there was a steely 
note in his voice Harry had never heard before. 
“There’s one certain way to prove what really 
happened. Ron, give me that rat” 

“What are you going to do with him if I give him to 
you?” Ron asked Lupin tensely. 

“Force him to show himself,” said Lupin. “If he really 
is a rat, it won’t hurt him.” 

Ron hesitated. Then at long last, he held out 
Scabbers and Lupin took him. Scabbers began to 
squeak without stopping, twisting and turning, his 
tiny black eyes bulging in his head. 

“Ready, Sirius?” said Lupin. 



Page | 408 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Black had already retrieved Snape’s wand from the 
bed. He approached Lupin and the struggling rat, and 
his wet eyes suddenly seemed to be burning in his 
face. 

“Together?” he said quietly. 

“I think so,” said Lupin, holding Scabbers tightly in 
one hand and his wand in the other. “On the count of 
three. One — two — THREE!” 

A flash of blue-white light erupted from both wands; 
for a moment, Scabbers was frozen in midair, his 
small gray form twisting madly — Ron yelled — the 
rat fell and hit the floor. There was another blinding 
flash of light and then — 

It was like watching a speeded-up film of a growing 
tree. A head was shooting upward from the ground; 
limbs were sprouting; a moment later, a man was 
standing where Scabbers had been, cringing and 
wringing his hands. Crookshanks was spitting and 
snarling on the bed; the hair on his back was 
standing up. 

He was a very short man, hardly taller than Harry 
and Hermione. His thin, colorless hair was unkempt 
and there was a large bald patch on top. He had the 
shrunken appearance of a plump man who has lost a 
lot of weight in a short time. His skin looked grubby, 
almost like Scabbers ’s fur, and something of the rat 
lingered around his pointed nose and his very small, 
watery eyes. He looked around at them all, his 
breathing fast and shallow. Harry saw his eyes dart to 
the door and back again. 

“Well, hello, Peter,” said Lupin pleasantly, as though 
rats frequently erupted into old school friends around 
him. “Long time, no see.” 

Page | 409 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“S — Sirius ... R — Remus ...” Even Pettigrew’s voice 
was squeaky. Again, his eyes darted toward the door. 
“My friends ... my old friends ...” 

Black’s wand arm rose, but Lupin seized him around 
the wrist, gave him a warning look, then turned again 
to Pettigrew, his voice light and casual. 

“We’ve been having a little chat, Peter, about what 
happened the night Lily and James died. You might 
have missed the finer points while you were 
squeaking around down there on the bed — ” 

“Remus,” gasped Pettigrew, and Harry could see 
beads of sweat breaking out over his pasty face, “you 
don’t believe him, do you... ? He tried to kill me, 
Remus. ...” 

“So we’ve heard,” said Lupin, more coldly. “I’d like to 
clear up one or two little matters with you, Peter, if 
you’d be so — ” 

“He’s come to try and kill me again!” Pettigrew 
squeaked suddenly, pointing at Black, and Harry saw 
that he used his middle finger, because his index was 
missing. “He killed Lily and James and now he’s going 
to kill me too. ... You’ve got to help me, Remus. ...” 

Black’s face looked more skull-like than ever as he 
stared at Pettigrew with his fathomless eyes. 

“No one’s going to try and kill you until we’ve sorted a 
few things out,” said Lupin. 

“Sorted things out?” squealed Pettigrew, looking 
wildly about him once more, eyes taking in the 
boarded windows and, again, the only door. “I knew 
he’d come after me! I knew he’d be back for me! I’ve 
been waiting for this for twelve years!” 

Page | 410 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You knew Sirius was going to break out of Azkaban?” 
said Lupin, his brow furrowed. “When nobody has 
ever done it before?” 

“He’s got dark powers the rest of us can only dream 
of!” Pettigrew shouted shrilly. “How else did he get out 
of there? I suppose He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named 
taught him a few tricks!” 

Black started to laugh, a horrible, mirthless laugh 
that filled the whole room. 

“Voldemort, teach me tricks?” he said. 

Pettigrew flinched as though Black had brandished a 
whip at him. 

“What, scared to hear your old master’s name?” said 
Black. “I don’t blame you, Peter. His lot aren’t very 
happy with you, are they?” 

“Don’t know what you mean, Sirius — ” muttered 
Pettigrew, his breathing faster than ever. His whole 
face was shining with sweat now. 

“You haven’t been hiding from me for twelve years,” 
said Black. “You’ve been hiding from Voldemort’s old 
supporters. I heard things in Azkaban, Peter. ... They 
all think you’re dead, or you’d have to answer to 
them. ... I’ve heard them screaming all sorts of things 
in their sleep. Sounds like they think the double- 
crosser double-crossed them. Voldemort went to the 
Potters’ on your information ... and Voldemort met his 
downfall there. And not all Voldemort’s supporters 
ended up in Azkaban, did they? There are still plenty 
out here, biding their time, pretending they’ve seen 
the error of their ways. ... If they ever got wind that 
you were still alive, Peter — ” 



Page | 411 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Don’t know ... what you’re talking about... said 
Pettigrew again, more shrilly than ever. He wiped his 
face on his sleeve and looked up at Lupin. “You don’t 
believe this — this madness, Remus — ” 

“I must admit, Peter, I have difficulty in 
understanding why an innocent man would want to 
spend twelve years as a rat,” said Lupin evenly. 

“Innocent, but scared!” squealed Pettigrew. “If 
Voldemort’s supporters were after me, it was because 
I put one of their best men in Azkaban — the spy, 
Sirius Black!” 

Black’s face contorted. 

“How dare you,” he growled, sounding suddenly like 
the bear-sized dog he had been. “I, a spy for 
Voldemort? When did I ever sneak around people who 
were stronger and more powerful than myself? But 
you, Peter — I’ll never understand why I didn’t see 
you were the spy from the start. You always liked big 
friends who’d look after you, didn’t you? It used to be 
us ... me and Remus ... and James. ...” 

Pettigrew wiped his face again; he was almost panting 
for breath. 

“Me, a spy ... must be out of your mind ... never ... 
don’t know how you can say such a — ” 

“Lily and James only made you Secret-Keeper 
because I suggested it,” Black hissed, so venomously 
that Pettigrew took a step backward. “I thought it was 
the perfect plan ... a bluff. ... Voldemort would be 
sure to come after me, would never dream they’d use 
a weak, talentless thing like you. ... It must have been 
the finest moment of your miserable life, telling 
Voldemort you could hand him the Potters.” 

Page | 412 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Pettigrew was muttering distractedly; Harry caught 
words like “far-fetched” and “lunacy,” but he couldn’t 
help paying more attention to the ashen color of 
Pettigrew’s face and the way his eyes continued to 
dart toward the windows and door. 

“Professor Lupin?” said Hermione timidly. “Can — can 
I say something?” 

“Certainly, Hermione,” said Lupin courteously. 

“Well — Scabbers — I mean, this — this man — he’s 
been sleeping in Harry’s dormitory for three years. If 
he’s working for You-Know-Who, how come he never 
tried to hurt Harry before now?” 

“There!” said Pettigrew shrilly, pointing at Ron with 
his maimed hand. “Thank you! You see, Remus? I 
have never hurt a hair of Harry’s head! Why should 
I?” 

“I’ll tell you why,” said Black. “Because you never did 
anything for anyone unless you could see what was in 
it for you. Voldemort’s been in hiding for fifteen years, 
they say he’s half dead. You weren’t about to commit 
murder right under Albus Dumbledore’s nose, for a 
wreck of a wizard who’d lost all of his power, were 
you? You’d want to be quite sure he was the biggest 
bully in the playground before you went back to him, 
wouldn’t you? Why else did you find a wizard family 
to take you in? Keeping an ear out for news, weren’t 
you, Peter? Just in case your old protector regained 
strength, and it was safe to rejoin him. ...” 

Pettigrew opened his mouth and closed it several 
times. He seemed to have lost the ability to talk. 

“Er — Mr. Black — Sirius?” said Hermione. 



Page | 413 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Black jumped at being addressed like this and stared 
at Hermione as though he had never seen anything 
quite like her. 

“If you don’t mind me asking, how — how did you get 
out of Azkaban, if you didn’t use Dark Magic?” 

“Thank you!” gasped Pettigrew, nodding frantically at 
her. “Exactly! Precisely what I — ” 

But Lupin silenced him with a look. Black was 
frowning slightly at Hermione, but not as though he 
were annoyed with her. He seemed to be pondering 
his answer. 

“I don’t know how I did it,” he said slowly. “I think the 
only reason I never lost my mind is that I knew I was 
innocent. That wasn’t a happy thought, so the 
dementors couldn’t suck it out of me ... but it kept me 
sane and knowing who I am . . . helped me keep my 
powers ... so when it all became . . . too much ... I 
could transform in my cell . . . become a dog. 
Dementors can’t see, you know. ...” He swallowed. 
“They feel their way toward people by feeding off their 
emotions. ... They could tell that my feelings were less 
— less human, less complex when I was a dog ... but 
they thought, of course, that I was losing my mind 
like everyone else in there, so it didn’t trouble them. 
But I was weak, very weak, and I had no hope of 
driving them away from me without a wand. ... 

“But then I saw Peter in that picture ... I realized he 
was at Hogwarts with Harry . . . perfectly positioned to 
act, if one hint reached his ears that the Dark Side 
was gathering strength again. ...” 

Pettigrew was shaking his head, mouthing 
noiselessly, but staring all the while at Black as 
though hypnotized. 

Page | 414 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




"... ready to strike at the moment he could be sure of 
allies ... and to deliver the last Potter to them. If he 
gave them Harry, who’d dare say he’d betrayed Lord 
Voldemort? He’d be welcomed back with honors. ... 

“So you see, I had to do something. I was the only one 
who knew Peter was still alive. ...” 

Harry remembered what Mr. Weasley had told Mrs. 
Weasley. “The guards say he’s been talking in his 
sleep ... always the same words ... ‘He’s at Hog warts.’ 



“It was as if someone had lit a fire in my head, and 
the dementors couldn’t destroy it. ... It wasn’t a 
happy feeling ... it was an obsession . . . but it gave me 
strength, it cleared my mind. So, one night when they 
opened my door to bring food, I slipped past them as 
a dog. ... It’s so much harder for them to sense 
animal emotions that they were confused. ... I was 
thin, very thin . . . thin enough to slip through the 
bars. ... I swam as a dog back to the mainland. ... I 
journeyed north and slipped into the Hogwarts 
grounds as a dog. I’ve been living in the forest ever 
since, except when I came to watch the Quidditch, of 
course. You fly as well as your father did, Harry. ...” 

He looked at Harry, who did not look away. 

“Believe me,” croaked Black. “Believe me, Harry. I 
never betrayed James and Lily. I would have died 
before I betrayed them.” 

And at long last, Harry believed him. Throat too tight 
to speak, he nodded. 

“No!” 



Page | 415 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Pettigrew had fallen to his knees as though Harry’s 
nod had been his own death sentence. He shuffled 
forward on his knees, groveling, his hands clasped in 
front of him as though praying. 

“Sirius — it’s me ... it’s Peter ... your friend ... you 
wouldn’t ...” 

Black kicked out and Pettigrew recoiled. 

“There’s enough filth on my robes without you 
touching them,” said Black. 

“Remus!” Pettigrew squeaked, turning to Lupin 
instead, writhing imploringly in front of him. “You 
don’t believe this ... wouldn’t Sirius have told you 
they’d changed the plan?” 

“Not if he thought I was the spy, Peter,” said Lupin. “I 
assume that’s why you didn’t tell me, Sirius?” he said 
casually over Pettigrew’s head. 

“Forgive me, Remus,” said Black. 

“Not at all, Padfoot, old friend,” said Lupin, who was 
now rolling up his sleeves. “And will you, in turn, 
forgive me for believing you were the spy?” 

“Of course,” said Black, and the ghost of a grin flitted 
across his gaunt face. He, too, began rolling up his 
sleeves. “Shall we kill him together?” 

“Yes, I think so,” said Lupin grimly. 

“You wouldn’t ... you won’t... ,” gasped Pettigrew. And 
he scrambled around to Ron. 



Page | 416 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ron ... haven’t I been a good friend ... a good pet? 

You won’t let them kill me, Ron, will you ... you’re on 
my side, aren’t you?” 

But Ron was staring at Pettigrew with the utmost 
revulsion. 

“I let you sleep in my bed\” he said. 

“Kind boy ... kind master ...” Pettigrew crawled toward 
Ron, “you won’t let them do it. ... I was your rat. ... I 
was a good pet. ...” 

“If you made a better rat than a human, it’s not much 
to boast about, Peter,” said Black harshly. Ron, going 
still paler with pain, wrenched his broken leg out of 
Pettigrew’s reach. Pettigrew turned on his knees, 
staggered forward, and seized the hem of Hermione’s 
robes. 

“Sweet girl ... clever girl ... you — you won’t let them. 
... Help me. ...” 

Hermione pulled her robes out of Pettigrew’s 
clutching hands and backed away against the wall, 
looking horrified. 

Pettigrew knelt, trembling uncontrollably, and turned 
his head slowly toward Harry. 

“Harry ... Harry ... you look just like your father ... 
just like him. ...” 

“HOW DARE YOU SPEAK TO HARRY?” roared Black. 
“HOW DARE YOU FACE HIM? HOW DARE YOU TALK 
ABOUT JAMES IN FRONT OF HIM?” 

“Harry,” whispered Pettigrew, shuffling toward him, 
hands outstretched. “Harry, James wouldn’t have 

Page | 417 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




wanted me killed. ... James would have understood, 
Harry ... he would have shown me mercy. ...” 



Both Black and Lupin strode forward, seized 
Pettigrew’s shoulders, and threw him backward onto 
the floor. He sat there, twitching with terror, staring 
up at them. 

“You sold Lily and James to Voldemort,” said Black, 
who was shaking too. “Do you deny it?” 

Pettigrew burst into tears. It was horrible to watch, 
like an oversized, balding baby, cowering on the floor. 

“Sirius, Sirius, what could I have done? The Dark 
Lord . . . you have no idea ... he has weapons you can’t 
imagine. ... I was scared, Sirius, I was never brave 
like you and Remus and James. I never meant it to 
happen. ... He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named forced me — 



“DONT LIE!” bellowed Black. “YOU’D BEEN PASSING 
INFORMATION TO HIM FOR A YEAR BEFORE LILY 
AND JAMES DIED! YOU WERE HIS SPY!” 

“He — he was taking over everywhere!” gasped 
Pettigrew. “Wh — what was there to be gained by 
refusing him?” 

“What was there to be gained by fighting the most evil 
wizard who has ever existed?” said Black, with a 
terribly fury in his face. “Only innocent lives, Peter!” 

“You don’t understand!” whined Pettigrew. “He would 
have killed me, Sirius!” 

“THEN YOU SHOULD HAVE DIED!” roared Black. 
“DIED RATHER THAN BETRAY YOUR FRIENDS, AS 
WE WOULD HAVE DONE FOR YOU!” 

Page | 418 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Black and Lupin stood shoulder to shoulder, wands 
raised. 

“You should have realized,” said Lupin quietly, “if 
Voldemort didn’t kill you, we would. Good-bye, Peter.” 

Hermione covered her face with her hands and turned 
to the wall. 

“NO!” Harry yelled. He ran forward, placing himself in 
front of Pettigrew, facing the wands. “You can’t kill 
him,” he said breathlessly. “You can’t.” 

Black and Lupin both looked staggered. 

“Harry, this piece of vermin is the reason you have no 
parents,” Black snarled. “This cringing bit of filth 
would have seen you die too, without turning a hair. 
You heard him. His own stinking skin meant more to 
him than your whole family.” 

“I know,” Harry panted. “We’ll take him up to the 
castle. We’ll hand him over to the dementors. ... He 
can go to Azkaban ... but don’t kill him.” 

“Harry!” gasped Pettigrew, and he flung his arms 
around Harry’s knees. “You — thank you — it’s more 
than I deserve — thank you — ” 

“Get off me,” Harry spat, throwing Pettigrew’s hands 
off him in disgust. “I’m not doing this for you. I’m 
doing it because — I don’t reckon my dad would’ve 
wanted them to become killers — just for you.” 

No one moved or made a sound except Pettigrew, 
whose breath was coming in wheezes as he clutched 
his chest. Black and Lupin were looking at each 
other. Then, with one movement, they lowered their 
wands. 

Page | 419 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“You’re the only person who has the right to decide, 
Harry,” said Black. “But think ... think what he did. 



“He can go to Azkaban,” Harry repeated. “If anyone 
deserves that place, he does. ...” 

Pettigrew was still wheezing behind him. 

“Very well,” said Lupin. “Stand aside, Harry.” 

Harry hesitated. 

“I’m going to tie him up,” said Lupin. “That’s all, I 
swear.” 

Harry stepped out of the way. Thin cords shot from 
Lupin’s wand this time, and next moment, Pettigrew 
was wriggling on the floor, bound and gagged. 

“But if you transform, Peter,” growled Black, his own 
wand pointing at Pettigrew too, “we will kill you. You 
agree, Harry?” 

Harry looked down at the pitiful figure on the floor 
and nodded so that Pettigrew could see him. 

“Right,” said Lupin, suddenly businesslike. “Ron, I 
can’t mend bones nearly as well as Madam Pomfrey, 
so I think it’s best if we just strap your leg up until we 
can get you to the hospital wing.” 

He hurried over to Ron, bent down, tapped Ron’s leg 
with his wand, and muttered, “Ferula.” Bandages 
spun up Ron’s leg, strapping it tightly to a splint. 
Lupin helped him to his feet; Ron put his weight 
gingerly on the leg and didn’t wince. 

“That’s better,” he said. “Thanks.” 

Page | 420 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“What about Professor Snape?” said Hermione in a 
small voice, looking down at Snape’s prone figure. 



“There’s nothing seriously wrong with him,” said 
Lupin, bending over Snape and checking his pulse. 
“You were just a little — overenthusiastic. Still out 
cold. Er — perhaps it will be best if we don’t revive 
him until we’re safely back in the castle. We can take 
him like this. ...” 

He muttered, “Mobilicorpus.” As though invisible 
strings were tied to Snape’s wrists, neck, and knees, 
he was pulled into a standing position, head still 
lolling unpleasantly, like a grotesque puppet. He hung 
a few inches above the ground, his limp feet dangling. 
Lupin picked up the Invisibility Cloak and tucked it 
safely into his pocket. 

“And two of us should be chained to this,” said Black, 
nudging Pettigrew with his toe. “Just to make sure.” 

“I’ll do it,” said Lupin. 

“And me,” said Ron savagely, limping forward. 

Black conjured heavy manacles from thin air; soon 
Pettigrew was upright again, left arm chained to 
Lupin’s right, right arm to Ron’s left. Ron’s face was 
set. He seemed to have taken Scabbers’s true identity 
as a personal insult. Crookshanks leapt lightly off the 
bed and led the way out of the room, his bottlebrush 
tail held jauntily high. 



Page | 421 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 






THE DEMENTOR’S KISS 

Harry had never been part of a stranger group. 
Crookshanks led the way down the stairs; Lupin, 
Pettigrew, and Ron went next, looking like entrants in 
a six-legged race. Next came Professor Snape, drifting 
creepily along, his toes hitting each stair as they 
descended, held up by his own wand, which was 
being pointed at him by Sirius. Harry and Hermione 
brought up the rear. 

Getting back into the tunnel was difficult. Lupin, 
Pettigrew, and Ron had to turn sideways to manage 
it; Lupin still had Pettigrew covered with his wand. 
Harry could see them edging awkwardly along the 
tunnel in single file. Crookshanks was still in the 
lead. Harry went right after Black, who was still 
making Snape drift along ahead of them; he kept 
bumping his lolling head on the low ceiling. Harry 
had the impression Black was making no effort to 
prevent this. 



Page | 422 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



“You know what this means?” Black said abruptly to 
Harry as they made their slow progress along the 
tunnel. “Turning Pettigrew in?” 

“You’re free,” said Harry. 

“Yes ... ,” said Black. “But I’m also — I don’t know if 
anyone ever told you — I’m your godfather.” 

“Yeah, I knew that,” said Harry. 

“Well ... your parents appointed me your guardian,” 
said Black stiffly. “If anything happened to them ...” 

Harry waited. Did Black mean what he thought he 
meant? 

“I’ll understand, of course, if you want to stay with 
your aunt and uncle,” said Black. “But ... well ... 
think about it. Once my name’s cleared ... if you 
wanted a ... a different home ...” 

Some sort of explosion took place in the pit of Harry’s 
stomach. 

“What — live with you?” he said, accidentally cracking 
his head on a bit of rock protruding from the ceiling. 
“Leave the Dursleys?” 

“Of course, I thought you wouldn’t want to,” said 
Black quickly. “I understand, I just thought I’d — ” 

“Are you insane?” said Harry, his voice easily as 
croaky as Black’s. “Of course I want to leave the 
Dursleys! Have you got a house? When can I move 
in?” 



Page | 423 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Black turned right around to look at him; Snape’s 
head was scraping the ceiling but Black didn’t seem 
to care. 

“You want to?” he said. “You mean it?” 

“Yeah, I mean it!” said Harry. 

Black’s gaunt face broke into the first true smile 
Harry had seen upon it. The difference it made was 
startling, as though a person ten years younger were 
shining through the starved mask; for a moment, he 
was recognizable as the man who had laughed at 
Harry’s parents’ wedding. 

They did not speak again until they had reached the 
end of the tunnel. Crookshanks darted up first; he 
had evidently pressed his paw to the knot on the 
trunk, because Lupin, Pettigrew, and Ron clambered 
upward without any sound of savaging branches. 

Black saw Snape up through the hole, then stood 
back for Harry and Hermione to pass. At last, all of 
them were out. 

The grounds were very dark now; the only light came 
from the distant windows of the castle. Without a 
word, they set off. Pettigrew was still wheezing and 
occasionally whimpering. Harry’s mind was buzzing. 
He was going to leave the Dursleys. He was going to 
live with Sirius Black, his parents’ best friend. ... He 
felt dazed. ... What would happen when he told the 
Dursleys he was going to live with the convict they’d 
seen on television... ! 

“One wrong move, Peter,” said Lupin threateningly 
ahead. His wand was still pointed sideways at 
Pettigrew’s chest. 



Page | 424 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Silently they tramped through the grounds, the castle 
lights growing slowly larger. Snape was still drifting 
weirdly ahead of Black, his chin bumping on his 
chest. And then — 

A cloud shifted. There were suddenly dim shadows on 
the ground. Their party was bathed in moonlight. 

Snape collided with Lupin, Pettigrew, and Ron, who 
had stopped abruptly. Black froze. He flung out one 
arm to make Harry and Hermione stop. 

Harry could see Lupin’s silhouette. He had gone rigid. 
Then his limbs began to shake. 

“Oh, my — ” Hermione gasped. “He didn’t take his 
potion tonight! He’s not safe!” 

“Run,” Black whispered. “Run. Now.” 

But Harry couldn’t run. Ron was chained to Pettigrew 
and Lupin. He leapt forward but Black caught him 
around the chest and threw him back. 

“Leave it to me — RUN!” 

There was a terrible snarling noise. Lupin’s head was 
lengthening. So was his body. His shoulders were 
hunching. Hair was sprouting visibly on his face and 
hands, which were curling into clawed paws. 
Crookshanks’s hair was on end again; he was backing 
away — 

As the werewolf reared, snapping its long jaws, Sirius 
disappeared from Harry’s side. He had transformed. 
The enormous, bearlike dog bounded forward. As the 
werewolf wrenched itself free of the manacle binding 
it, the dog seized it about the neck and pulled it 



Page | 425 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




backward, away from Ron and Pettigrew. They were 
locked, jaw to jaw, claws ripping at each other — 

Harry stood, transfixed by the sight, too intent upon 
the battle to notice anything else. It was Hermione’s 
scream that alerted him — 

Pettigrew had dived for Lupin’s dropped wand. Ron, 
unsteady on his bandaged leg, fell. There was a bang, 
a burst of light — and Ron lay motionless on the 
ground. Another bang — Crookshanks flew into the 
air and back to the earth in a heap. 

“ ExpelliarmusV’ Harry yelled, pointing his own wand 
at Pettigrew; Lupin’s wand flew high into the air and 
out of sight. “Stay where you are!” Harry shouted, 
running forward. 

Too late. Pettigrew had transformed. Harry saw his 
bald tail whip through the manacle on Ron’s 
outstretched arm and heard a scurrying through the 
grass. 

There was a howl and a rumbling growl; Harry turned 
to see the werewolf taking flight; it was galloping into 
the forest — 

“Sirius, he’s gone, Pettigrew transformed!” Harry 
yelled. 

Black was bleeding; there were gashes across his 
muzzle and back, but at Harry’s words he scrambled 
up again, and in an instant, the sound of his paws 
faded to silence as he pounded away across the 
grounds. 

Harry and Hermione dashed over to Ron. 



Page | 426 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“What did he do to him?” Hermione whispered. Ron’s 
eyes were only half-closed, his mouth hung open; he 
was definitely alive, they could hear him breathing, 
but he didn’t seem to recognize them. 

“I don’t know. ...” 

Harry looked desperately around. Black and Lupin 
both gone . . . they had no one but Snape for company, 
still hanging, unconscious, in midair. 

“We’d better get them up to the castle and tell 
someone,” said Harry, pushing his hair out of his 
eyes, trying to think straight. Come — ” 

But then, from beyond the range of their vision, they 
heard a yelping, a whining: a dog in pain. ... 

“Sirius,” Harry muttered, staring into the darkness. 

He had a moment’s indecision, but there was nothing 
they could do for Ron at the moment, and by the 
sound of it, Black was in trouble — 

Harry set off at a run, Hermione right behind him. 

The yelping seemed to be coming from the ground 
near the edge of the lake. They pelted toward it, and 
Harry, running flat out, felt the cold without realizing 
what it must mean — 

The yelping stopped abruptly. As they reached the 
lakeshore, they saw why — Sirius had turned back 
into a man. He was crouched on all fours, his hands 
over his head. 

“iVooo,” he moaned. “Noooo ... please. ...” 

And then Harry saw them. Dementors, at least a 
hundred of them, gliding in a black mass around the 

Page | 427 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




lake toward them. He spun around, the familiar, icy 
cold penetrating his insides, fog starting to obscure 
his vision; more were appearing out of the darkness 
on every side; they were encircling them. ... 

“Hermione, think of something happy!” Harry yelled, 
raising his wand, blinking furiously to try and clear 
his vision, shaking his head to rid it of the faint 
screaming that had started inside it — 

I’m going to live with my godfather. I’m leaving the 
Dursleys. 

He forced himself to think of Black, and only Black, 
and began to chant: “Expecto patronum). Expecto 
patronum).” 

Black gave a shudder, rolled over, and lay motionless 
on the ground, pale as death. 

Hell be all right. I’m going to go and live with him. 

“Expecto patronum). Hermione, help me! Expecto 
patronum).” 

“Expecto — ” Hermione whispered, “expecto — expecto 



But she couldn’t do it. The dementors were closing in, 
barely ten feet from them. They formed a solid wall 
around Harry and Hermione, and were getting closer. 



“EXPECTO PATRONUM” Harry yelled, trying to blot 
the screaming from his ears. “EXPECTO PATRONUM.” 

A thin wisp of silver escaped his wand and hovered 
like mist before him. At the same moment, Harry felt 



Page | 428 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Hermione collapse next to him. He was alone ... 
completely alone. ... 

“Expecto — expecto patronum — ” 

Harry felt his knees hit the cold grass. Fog was 
clouding his eyes. With a huge effort, he fought to 
remember — Sirius was innocent — innocent — We’ll 
be okay — I’m going to live with him — 

“ Expecto patronum J” he gasped. 

By the feeble light of his formless Patronus, he saw a 
dementor halt, very close to him. It couldn’t walk 
through the cloud of silver mist Harry had conjured. 

A dead, slimy hand slid out from under the cloak. It 
made a gesture as though to sweep the Patronus 
aside. 

“No — no — ” Harry gasped. “He’s innocent ... expecto 
— expecto patronum — ” 

He could feel them watching him, hear their rattling 
breath like an evil wind around him. The nearest 
dementor seemed to be considering him. Then it 
raised both its rotting hands — and lowered its hood. 

Where there should have been eyes, there was only 
thin, gray scabbed skin, stretched blankly over empty 
sockets. But there was a mouth ... a gaping, 
shapeless hole, sucking the air with the sound of a 
death rattle. 

A paralyzing terror filled Harry so that he couldn’t 
move or speak. His Patronus flickered and died. 

White fog was blinding him. He had to fight ... expecto 
patronum ... he couldn’t see ... and in the distance, he 
heard the familiar screaming . . . expecto patronum . . . 

Page | 429 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




he groped in the mist for Sirius, and found his arm ... 
they weren’t going to take him. ... 

But a pair of strong, clammy hands suddenly 
attached themselves around Harry’s neck. They were 
forcing his face upward. ... He could feel its breath. ... 
It was going to get rid of him first. ... He could feel its 
putrid breath. . . . His mother was screaming in his 
ears. ... She was going to be the last thing he ever 
heard — 

And then, through the fog that was drowning him, he 
thought he saw a silvery light growing brighter and 
brighter. ... He felt himself fall forward onto the grass. 
... Facedown, too weak to move, sick and shaking, 
Harry opened his eyes. The dementor must have 
released him. The blinding light was illuminating the 
grass around him. ... The screaming had stopped, the 
cold was ebbing away. . . . 

Something was driving the dementors back. ... It was 
circling around him and Black and Hermione. ... They 
were leaving. ... The air was warm again. ... 

With every ounce of strength he could muster, Harry 
raised his head a few inches and saw an animal amid 
the light, galloping away across the lake. ... Eyes 
blurred with sweat, Harry tried to make out what it 
was. ... It was as bright as a unicorn. ... Fighting to 
stay conscious, Harry watched it canter to a halt as it 
reached the opposite shore. For a moment, Harry 
saw, by its brightness, somebody welcoming it back 
. . . raising his hand to pat it . . . someone who looked 
strangely familiar ... but it couldn’t be ... 

Harry didn’t understand. He couldn’t think anymore. 
He felt the last of his strength leave him, and his head 
hit the ground as he fainted. 



Page | 430 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 





HERMIONE’S SECRET 

“Shocking business ... shocking ... miracle none of 
them died . . . never heard the like ... by thunder, it 
was lucky you were there, Snape. ...” 

“Thank you, Minister.” 

“Order of Merlin, Second Class, I’d say. First Class, if 
I can wangle it!” 

“Thank you very much indeed, Minister.” 

“Nasty cut you’ve got there. ... Black’s work, I 
suppose?” 

“As a matter of fact, it was Potter, Weasley, and 
Granger, Minister. ...” 

“iVo!” 

“Black had bewitched them, I saw it immediately. A 
Confundus Charm, to judge by their behavior. They 
seemed to think there was a possibility he was 

Page | 431 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



innocent. They weren’t responsible for their actions. 
On the other hand, their interference might have 
permitted Black to escape. ... They obviously thought 
they were going to catch Black single-handed. They’ve 
got away with a great deal before now. ... I’m afraid 
it’s given them a rather high opinion of themselves ... 
and of course Potter has always been allowed an 
extraordinary amount of license by the headmaster — 



“Ah, well, Snape ... Harry Potter, you know ... we’ve 
all got a bit of a blind spot where he’s concerned.” 

“And yet — is it good for him to be given so much 
special treatment? Personally, I try and treat him like 
any other student. And any other student would be 
suspended — at the very least — for leading his 
friends into such danger. Consider, Minister — 
against all school rules — after all the precautions 
put in place for his protection — out-of-bounds, at 
night, consorting with a werewolf and a murderer — 
and I have reason to believe he has been visiting 
Hogsmeade illegally too — ” 

“Well, well ... we shall see, Snape, we shall see. ... The 
boy has undoubtedly been foolish. ...” 

Harry lay listening with his eyes tight shut. He felt 
very groggy. The words he was hearing seemed to be 
traveling very slowly from his ears to his brain, so 
that it was difficult to understand. ... His limbs felt 
like lead; his eyelids too heavy to lift. ... He wanted to 
lie here, on this comfortable bed, forever. ... 

“What amazes me most is the behavior of the 
dementors ... you’ve really no idea what made them 
retreat, Snape?” 



Page | 432 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“No, Minister ... by the time I had come ’round they 
were heading back to their positions at the entrances. 



“Extraordinary. And yet Black, and Harry, and the girl 



“All unconscious by the time I reached them. I bound 
and gagged Black, naturally, conjured stretchers, and 
brought them all straight back to the castle.” 

There was a pause. Harry’s brain seemed to be 
moving a little faster, and as it did, a gnawing 
sensation grew in the pit of his stomach. ... 

He opened his eyes. 

Everything was slightly blurred. Somebody had 
removed his glasses. He was lying in the dark hospital 
wing. At the very end of the ward, he could make out 
Madam Pomfrey with her back to him, bending over a 
bed. Harry squinted. Ron’s red hair was visible 
beneath Madam Pomfrey’s arm. 

Harry moved his head over on the pillow. In the bed 
to his right lay Hermione. Moonlight was falling 
across her bed. Her eyes were open too. She looked 
petrified, and when she saw that Harry was awake, 
pressed a finger to her lips, then pointed to the 
hospital wing door. It was ajar, and the voices of 
Cornelius Fudge and Snape were coming through it 
from the corridor outside. 

Madam Pomfrey now came walking briskly up the 
dark ward to Harry’s bed. He turned to look at her. 
She was carrying the largest block of chocolate he 
had ever seen in his life. It looked like a small 
boulder. 



Page | 433 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Ah, you’re awake!” she said briskly. She placed the 
chocolate on Harry’s bedside table and began 
breaking it apart with a small hammer. 

“How’s Ron?” said Harry and Hermione together. 

“He’ll live,” said Madam Pomfrey grimly. “As for you 
two ... you’ll be staying here until I’m satisfied you’re 
— Potter, what do you think you’re doing?” 

Harry was sitting up, putting his glasses back on, and 
picking up his wand. 

“I need to see the headmaster,” he said. 

“Potter,” said Madam Pomfrey soothingly, “it’s all 
right. They’ve got Black. He’s locked away upstairs. 
The dementors will be performing the kiss any 
moment now — ” 

“WHAT?” 

Harry jumped up out of bed; Hermione had done the 
same. But his shout had been heard in the corridor 
outside; next second, Cornelius Fudge and Snape had 
entered the ward. 

“Harry, Harry, what’s this?” said Fudge, looking 
agitated. “You should be in bed — has he had any 
chocolate?” he asked Madam Pomfrey anxiously. 

“Minister, listen!” Harry said. “Sirius Black’s innocent! 
Peter Pettigrew faked his own death! We saw him 
tonight! You can’t let the dementors do that thing to 
Sirius, he’s — ” 

But Fudge was shaking his head with a small smile 
on his face. 



Page | 434 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Harry, Harry, you’re very confused, you’ve been 
through a dreadful ordeal, lie back down, now, we’ve 
got everything under control. ...” 

“YOU HAVEN’T!” Harry yelled. “YOU VE GOT THE 
WRONG MAN!” 

“Minister, listen, please,” Hermione said; she had 
hurried to Harry’s side and was gazing imploringly 
into Fudge’s face. “I saw him too. It was Ron’s rat, 
he’s an Animagus, Pettigrew, I mean, and — ” 

“You see, Minister?” said Snape. “Confunded, both of 
them. ... Black’s done a very good job on them. ...” 

“WE’RE NOT CONFUNDED!” Harry roared. 

“Minister! Professor!” said Madam Pomfrey angrily. “I 
must insist that you leave. Potter is my patient, and 
he should not be distressed!” 

“I’m not distressed, I’m trying to tell them what 
happened!” Harry said furiously. “If they’d just listen 



But Madam Pomfrey suddenly stuffed a large chunk 
of chocolate into Harry’s mouth; he choked, and she 
seized the opportunity to force him back onto the bed. 

“Now, please, Minister, these children need care. 
Please leave — ” 

The door opened again. It was Dumbledore. Harry 
swallowed his mouthful of chocolate with great 
difficulty and got up again. 

“Professor Dumbledore, Sirius Black — ” 



Page | 435 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“For heaven’s sake!” said Madam Pomfrey 
hysterically. “Is this a hospital wing or not? 
Headmaster, I must insist — ” 

“My apologies, Poppy, but I need a word with Mr. 
Potter and Miss Granger,” said Dumbledore calmly. “I 
have just been talking to Sirius Black — ” 

“I suppose he’s told you the same fairy tale he’s 
planted in Potter’s mind?” spat Snape. “Something 
about a rat, and Pettigrew being alive — ” 

“That, indeed, is Black’s story,” said Dumbledore, 
surveying Snape closely through his half-moon 
spectacles. 

“And does my evidence count for nothing?” snarled 
Snape. “Peter Pettigrew was not in the Shrieking 
Shack, nor did I see any sign of him on the grounds.” 

“That was because you were knocked out, Professor!” 
said Hermione earnestly. “You didn’t arrive in time to 
hear — ” 

“Miss Granger, HOLD YOUR TONGUE!” 

“Now, Snape,” said Fudge, startled, “the young lady is 
disturbed in her mind, we must make allowances — ” 

“I would like to speak to Harry and Hermione alone,” 
said Dumbledore abruptly. “Cornelius, Severus, 

Poppy — please leave us.” 

“Headmaster!” sputtered Madam Pomfrey “They need 
treatment, they need rest — ” 

“This cannot wait,” said Dumbledore. “I must insist.” 



Page | 436 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Madam Pomfrey pursed her lips and strode away into 
her office at the end of the ward, slamming the door 
behind her. Fudge consulted the large gold pocket 
watch dangling from his waistcoat. 

“The dementors should have arrived by now,” he said. 
“Ill go and meet them. Dumbledore, 111 see you 
upstairs.” 

He crossed to the door and held it open for Snape, 
but Snape hadn’t moved. 

“You surely don’t believe a word of Black’s story?” 
Snape whispered, his eyes fixed on Dumbledore ’s 
face. 

“I wish to speak to Harry and Hermione alone,” 
Dumbledore repeated. 

Snape took a step toward Dumbledore. 

“Sirius Black showed he was capable of murder at the 
age of sixteen,” he breathed. “You haven’t forgotten 
that, Headmaster? You haven’t forgotten that he once 
tried to kill me?” 

“My memory is as good as it ever was, Severus,” said 
Dumbledore quietly. 

Snape turned on his heel and marched through the 
door Fudge was still holding. It closed behind them, 
and Dumbledore turned to Harry and Hermione. They 
both burst into speech at the same time. 

“Professor, Black’s telling the truth — we saw 
Pettigrew — ” 

“ — he escaped when Professor Lupin turned into a 
werewolf — ” 

Page | 437 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“ — he’s a rat — ” 



“ — Pettigrew’s front paw, I mean, finger, he cut it off 



“ — Pettigrew attacked Ron, it wasn’t Sirius — ” 

But Dumbledore held up his hand to stem the flood of 
explanations. 

“It is your turn to listen, and I beg you will not 
interrupt me, because there is very little time,” he 
said quietly. “There is not a shred of proof to support 
Black’s story, except your word — and the word of 
two thirteen-year-old wizards will not convince 
anybody. A street full of eyewitnesses swore they saw 
Sirius murder Pettigrew. I myself gave evidence to the 
Ministry that Sirius had been the Potters’ Secret- 
Keeper.” 

“Professor Lupin can tell you — ” Harry said, unable to 
stop himself. 

“Professor Lupin is currently deep in the forest, 
unable to tell anyone anything. By the time he is 
human again, it will be too late, Sirius will be worse 
than dead. I might add that werewolves are so 
mistrusted by most of our kind that his support will 
count for very little — and the fact that he and Sirius 
are old friends — ” 

“But — ” 

“ Listen to me, Harry. It is too late, you understand 
me? You must see that Professor Snape’s version of 
events is far more convincing than yours.” 

“He hates Sirius,” Hermione said desperately. “All 
because of some stupid trick Sirius played on him — ” 

Page | 438 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Sirius has not acted like an innocent man. The 
attack on the Fat Lady — entering Gryffindor Tower 
with a knife — without Pettigrew, alive or dead, we 
have no chance of overturning Sirius’s sentence.” 

“But you believe us.” 

“Yes, I do,” said Dumbledore quietly. “But I have no 
power to make other men see the truth, or to overrule 
the Minister of Magic. ...” 

Harry stared up into the grave face and felt as though 
the ground beneath him were falling sharply away. He 
had grown used to the idea that Dumbledore could 
solve anything. He had expected Dumbledore to pull 
some amazing solution out of the air. But no . . . their 
last hope was gone. 

“What we need,” said Dumbledore slowly, and his 
light blue eyes moved from Harry to Hermione, “is 
more time.” 

“But — ” Hermione began. And then her eyes became 
very round. “OH!” 

“Now, pay attention,” said Dumbledore, speaking very 
low, and very clearly. “Sirius is locked in Professor 
Flitwick’s office on the seventh floor. Thirteenth 
window from the right of the West Tower. If all goes 
well, you will be able to save more than one innocent 
life tonight. But remember this, both of you: you must 
not be seen. Miss Granger, you know the law — you 
know what is at stake. ... You — must — not — be — 
seen.” 

Harry didn’t have a clue what was going on. 
Dumbledore had turned on his heel and looked back 
as he reached the door. 



Page | 439 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I am going to lock you in. It is — ” he consulted his 
watch, “five minutes to midnight. Miss Granger, three 
turns should do it. Good luck.” 

“Good luck?” Harry repeated as the door closed 
behind Dumbledore. “Three turns? What’s he talking 
about? What are we supposed to do?” 

But Hermione was fumbling with the neck of her 
robes, pulling from beneath them a very long, very 
fine gold chain. 

“Harry, come here,” she said urgently. “Quick).” 

Harry moved toward her, completely bewildered. She 
was holding the chain out. He saw a tiny, sparkling 
hourglass hanging from it. 

“Here — ” 

She had thrown the chain around his neck too. 

“Ready?” she said breathlessly. 

“What are we doing?” Harry said, completely lost. 

Hermione turned the hourglass over three times. 

The dark ward dissolved. Harry had the sensation 
that he was flying very fast, backward. A blur of 
colors and shapes rushed past him, his ears were 
pounding, he tried to yell but couldn’t hear his own 
voice — 

And then he felt solid ground beneath his feet, and 
everything came into focus again — 

He was standing next to Hermione in the deserted 
entrance hall and a stream of golden sunlight was 

Page | 440 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




falling across the paved floor from the open front 
doors. He looked wildly around at Hermione, the 
chain of the hourglass cutting into his neck. 

“Hermione, what — ?” 

“In here!” Hermione seized Harry’s arm and dragged 
him across the hall to the door of a broom closet; she 
opened it, pushed him inside among the buckets and 
mops, then slammed the door behind them. 

“What — how — Hermione, what happened?” 

“We’ve gone back in time,” Hermione whispered, 
lifting the chain off Harry’s neck in the darkness. 
“Three hours back ...” 

Harry found his own leg and gave it a very hard 
pinch. It hurt a lot, which seemed to rule out the 
possibility that he was having a very bizarre dream. 

“But — ” 

“Shh! Listen! Someone’s coming! I think — I think it 
might be us!” 

Hermione had her ear pressed against the cupboard 
door. 

“Footsteps across the hall ... yes, I think it’s us going 
down to Hagrid’s!” 

“Are you telling me,” Harry whispered, “that we’re 
here in this cupboard and we’re out there too?” 

“Yes,” said Hermione, her ear still glued to the 
cupboard door. “I’m sure it’s us. It doesn’t sound like 
more than three people ... and we’re walking slowly 
because we’re under the Invisibility Cloak — ” 

Page | 441 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




She broke off, still listening intently. 



“We’ve gone down the front steps. ...” 

Hermione sat down on an upturned bucket, looking 
desperately anxious, but Harry wanted a few 
questions answered. 

“Where did you get that hourglass thing?” 

“It’s called a Time-Turner,” Hermione whispered, “and 
I got it from Professor McGonagall on our first day 
back. I’ve been using it all year to get to all my 
lessons. Professor McGonagall made me swear I 
wouldn’t tell anyone. She had to write all sorts of 
letters to the Ministry of Magic so I could have one. 
She had to tell them that I was a model student, and 
that I’d never, ever use it for anything except my 
studies. ... I’ve been turning it back so I could do 
hours over again, that’s how I’ve been doing several 
lessons at once, see? But ... 

“Harry, I don’t understand what Dumbledore wants us 
to do. Why did he tell us to go back three hours? 

How’s that going to help Sirius?” 

Harry stared at her shadowy face. 

“There must be something that happened around now 
he wants us to change,” he said slowly. “What 
happened? We were walking down to Hagrid’s three 
hours ago. ...” 

“This is three hours ago, and we are walking down to 
Hagrid’s,” said Hermione. “We just heard ourselves 
leaving. ...” 

Harry frowned; he felt as though he were screwing up 
his whole brain in concentration. 

Page | 442 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Dumbledore just said — just said we could save 
more than one innocent life. ...” And then it hit him. 
“Hermione, we’re going to save Buckbeak!” 

“But — how will that help Sirius?” 

“Dumbledore said — he just told us where the 
window is — the window of Flitwick’s office! Where 
they’ve got Sirius locked up! We’ve got to fly 
Buckbeak up to the window and rescue Sirius! Sirius 
can escape on Buckbeak — they can escape together!” 

From what Harry could see of Hermione’s face, she 
looked terrified. 

“If we manage that without being seen, it’ll be a 
miracle!” 

“Well, we’ve got to try, haven’t we?” said Harry. He 
stood up and pressed his ear against the door. 

“Doesn’t sound like anyone’s there. ... Come on, let’s 

go. ...” 

Harry pushed open the closet door. The entrance hall 
was deserted. As quietly and quickly as they could, 
they darted out of the closet and down the stone 
steps. The shadows were already lengthening, the 
tops of the trees in the Forbidden Forest gilded once 
more with gold. 

“If anyone’s looking out of the window — ” Hermione 
squeaked, looking up at the castle behind them. 

“Well run for it,” said Harry determinedly. “Straight 
into the forest, all right? We’ll have to hide behind a 
tree or something and keep a lookout — ” 



Page | 443 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Okay, but well go around by the greenhouses!” said 
Hermione breathlessly. “We need to keep out of sight 
of Hagrid’s front door, or well see us! We must be 
nearly at Hagrid’s by now!” 

Still working out what she meant, Harry set off at a 
sprint, Hermione behind him. They tore across the 
vegetable gardens to the greenhouses, paused for a 
moment behind them, then set off again, fast as they 
could, skirting around the Whomping Willow, tearing 
toward the shelter of the forest. ... 

Safe in the shadows of the trees, Harry turned 
around; seconds later, Hermione arrived beside him, 
panting. 

“Right,” she gasped. “We need to sneak over to 
Hagrid’s. ... Keep out of sight, Harry. ...” 

They made their way silently through the trees, 
keeping to the very edge of the forest. Then, as they 
glimpsed the front of Hagrid’s house, they heard a 
knock upon his door. They moved quickly behind a 
wide oak trunk and peered out from either side. 

Hagrid had appeared in his doorway, shaking and 
white, looking around to see who had knocked. And 
Harry heard his own voice. 

“It’s us. We’re wearing the Invisibility Cloak. Let us in 
and we can take it off.” 

“Yeh shouldn’ve come!” Hagrid whispered. He stood 
back, then shut the door quickly. 

“This is the weirdest thing we’ve ever done,” Harry 
said fervently. 

“Let’s move along a bit,” Hermione whispered. “We 
need to get nearer to Buckbeak!” 

Page | 444 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




They crept through the trees until they saw the 
nervous hippogriff, tethered to the fence around 
Hagrid’s pumpkin patch. 

“Now?” Harry whispered. 

“No!” said Hermione. “If we steal him now, those 
Committee people will think Hagrid set him free! 

We’ve got to wait until they’ve seen he’s tied outside!” 

“That’s going to give us about sixty seconds,” said 
Harry. This was starting to seem impossible. 

At that moment, there was a crash of breaking china 
from inside Hagrid’s cabin. 

“That’s Hagrid breaking the milk jug,” Hermione 
whispered. “I’m going to find Scabbers in a moment — 



Sure enough, a few minutes later, they heard 
Hermione ’s shriek of surprise. 

“Hermione,” said Harry suddenly, “what if we — we 
just run in there and grab Pettigrew — ” 

“No!” said Hermione in a terrified whisper. “Don’t you 
understand? We’re breaking one of the most 
important wizarding laws! Nobody’s supposed to 
change time, nobody! You heard Dumbledore, if we’re 
seen — ” 

“We’d only be seen by ourselves and Hagrid!” 

“Harry, what do you think you’d do if you saw 
yourself bursting into Hagrid’s house?” said 
Hermione. 



Page | 445 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I’d — I’d think I’d gone mad,” said Harry, “or I’d think 
there was some Dark Magic going on — ” 



“ Exactly ! You wouldn’t understand, you might even 
attack yourself! Don’t you see? Professor McGonagall 
told me what awful things have happened when 
wizards have meddled with time. ... Loads of them 
ended up killing their past or future selves by 
mistake!” 

“Okay!” said Harry. “It was just an idea, I just thought 



But Hermione nudged him and pointed toward the 
castle. Harry moved his head a few inches to get a 
clear view of the distant front doors. Dumbledore, 
Fudge, the old Committee member, and Macnair the 
executioner were coming down the steps. 

“We’re about to come out!” Hermione breathed. 

And sure enough, moments later, Hagrid’s back door 
opened, and Harry saw himself, Ron, and Hermione 
walking out of it with Hagrid. It was, without a doubt, 
the strangest sensation of his life, standing behind 
the tree, and watching himself in the pumpkin patch. 

“It’s okay, Beaky, it’s okay ... ,” Hagrid said to 
Buckbeak. Then he turned to Harry, Ron, and 
Hermione. “Go on. Get goin’.” 

“Hagrid, we can’t — ” 

“Well tell them what really happened — ” 

“They can’t kill him — ” 

“Go! It’s bad enough without you lot in trouble an’ 
all!” 

Page | 446 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry watched the Hermione in the pumpkin patch 
throw the Invisibility Cloak over him and Ron. 

“Go quick. Don’ listen. ...” 

There was a knock on Hagrid’s front door. The 
execution party had arrived. Hagrid turned around 
and headed back into his cabin, leaving the back door 
ajar. Harry watched the grass flatten in patches all 
around the cabin and heard three pairs of feet 
retreating. He, Ron, and Hermione had gone ... but 
the Harry and Hermione hidden in the trees could 
now hear what was happening inside the cabin 
through the back door. 

“Where is the beast?” came the cold voice of Macnair. 

“Out — outside,” Hagrid croaked. 

Harry pulled his head out of sight as Macnair’s face 
appeared at Hagrid’s window, staring out at 
Buckbeak. Then they heard Fudge. 

“We — er — have to read you the official notice of 
execution, Hagrid. I’ll make it quick. And then you 
and Macnair need to sign it. Macnair, you’re 
supposed to listen too, that’s procedure — ” 

Macnair’s face vanished from the window. It was now 
or never. 

“Wait here,” Harry whispered to Hermione. “I’ll do it.” 

As Fudge’s voice started again, Harry darted out from 
behind his tree, vaulted the fence into the pumpkin 
patch, and approached Buckbeak. 

“It is the decision of the Committee for the Disposal of 
Dangerous Creatures that the hippogriff Buckbeak, 

Page | 447 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




hereafter called the condemned, shall be executed on 
the sixth of June at sundown — ” 

Careful not to blink, Harry stared up into Buckbeak’s 
fierce orange eyes once more and bowed. Buckbeak 
sank to his scaly knees and then stood up again. 
Harry began to fumble with the knot of rope tying 
Buckbeak to the fence. 

"... sentenced to execution by beheading, to be carried 
out by the Committee’s appointed executioner, Walden 
Macnair ...” 

“Come on, Buckbeak,” Harry murmured, “come on, 
we’re going to help you. Quietly ... quietly ...” 

"... as witnessed below. Hagrid, you sign here. ...” 

Harry threw all his weight onto the rope, but 
Buckbeak had dug in his front feet. 

“Well, let’s get this over with,” said the reedy voice of 
the Committee member from inside Hagrid’s cabin. 
“Hagrid, perhaps it will be better if you stay inside — ” 

“No, I — I wan’ ter be with him. ... I don’ wan’ him ter 
be alone — ” 

Footsteps echoed from within the cabin. 

“Buckbeak, move\” Harry hissed. 

Harry tugged harder on the rope around Buckbeak’s 
neck. The hippogriff began to walk, rustling its wings 
irritably. They were still ten feet away from the forest, 
in plain view of Hagrid’s back door. 

“One moment, please, Macnair,” came Dumbledore’s 
voice. “You need to sign too.” The footsteps stopped. 

Page | 448 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry heaved on the rope. Buckbeak snapped his 
beak and walked a little faster. 



Hermione ’s white face was sticking out from behind a 
tree. 

“Harry, hurry!” she mouthed. 

Harry could still hear Dumbledore’s voice talking from 
within the cabin. He gave the rope another wrench. 
Buckbeak broke into a grudging trot. They had 
reached the trees. ... 

“Quick! Quick!” Hermione moaned, darting out from 
behind her tree, seizing the rope too and adding her 
weight to make Buckbeak move faster. Harry looked 
over his shoulder; they were now blocked from sight; 
they couldn’t see Hagrid’s garden at all. 

“Stop!” he whispered to Hermione. “They might hear 
us — ” 



Hagrid’s back door had opened with a bang. Harry, 
Hermione, and Buckbeak stood quite still; even the 
hippogriff seemed to be listening intently. 

Silence . . . then — 

“Where is it?” said the reedy voice of the Committee 
member. “Where is the beast?” 

“It was tied here!” said the executioner furiously. “I 
saw it! Just here!” 

“How extraordinary,” said Dumbledore. There was a 
note of amusement in his voice. 

“Beaky!” said Hagrid huskily. 

Page | 449 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




There was a swishing noise, and the thud of an axe. 
The executioner seemed to have swung it into the 
fence in anger. And then came the howling, and this 
time they could hear Hagrid ’s words through his sobs. 

“Gone! Gone! Bless his little beak, he’s gone\ Musta 
pulled himself free! Beaky, yeh clever boy!” 

Buckbeak started to strain against the rope, trying to 
get back to Hagrid. Harry and Hermione tightened 
their grip and dug their heels into the forest floor to 
stop him. 

“Someone untied him!” the executioner was snarling. 
“We should search the grounds, the forest — ” 

“Macnair, if Buckbeak has indeed been stolen, do you 
really think the thief will have led him away on foot?” 
said Dumbledore, still sounding amused. “Search the 
skies, if you will. ... Hagrid, I could do with a cup of 
tea. Or a large brandy.” 

“O’ — o’ course, Professor,” said Hagrid, who sounded 
weak with happiness. “Come in, come in. ...” 

Harry and Hermione listened closely. They heard 
footsteps, the soft cursing of the executioner, the 
snap of the door, and then silence once more. 

“Now what?” whispered Harry, looking around. 

“Well have to hide in here,” said Hermione, who 
looked very shaken. “We need to wait until they’ve 
gone back to the castle. Then we wait until it’s safe to 
fly Buckbeak up to Sirius’s window. He won’t be there 
for another couple of hours. ... Oh, this is going to be 
difficult. ...” 



Page | 450 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




She looked nervously over her shoulder into the 
depths of the forest. The sun was setting now. 

“We’re going to have to move,” said Harry, thinking 
hard. “We’ve got to be able to see the Whomping 
Willow, or we won’t know what’s going on.” 

“Okay,” said Hermione, getting a firmer grip on 
Buckbeak’s rope. “But we’ve got to keep out of sight, 
Harry, remember. ...” 

They moved around the edge of the forest, darkness 
falling thickly around them, until they were hidden 
behind a clump of trees through which they could 
make out the Willow. 

“There’s Ron!” said Harry suddenly. 

A dark figure was sprinting across the lawn and its 
shout echoed through the still night air. 

“Get away from him — get away — Scabbers, come 
here — ” 

And then they saw two more figures materialize out of 
nowhere. Harry watched himself and Hermione 
chasing after Ron. Then he saw Ron dive. 

“Gotchcd Get off, you stinking cat — ” 

“There’s Sirius!” said Harry. The great shape of the 
dog had bounded out from the roots of the Willow. 
They saw him bowl Harry over, then seize Ron. ... 

“Looks even worse from here, doesn’t it?” said Harry, 
watching the dog pulling Ron into the roots. “Ouch — 
look, I just got walloped by the tree — and so did you 
— this is weird — ” 



Page | 451 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




The Whomping Willow was creaking and lashing out 
with its lower branches; they could see themselves 
darting here and there, trying to reach the trunk. And 
then the tree froze. 

“That was Crookshanks pressing the knot,” said 
Hermione. 

“And there we go ... ,” Harry muttered. “We’re in.” 

The moment they disappeared, the tree began to move 
again. Seconds later, they heard footsteps quite close 
by. Dumbledore, Macnair, Fudge, and the old 
Committee member were making their way up to the 
castle. 

“Right after we’d gone down into the passage!” said 
Hermione. “If only Dumbledore had come with us ...” 

“Macnair and Fudge would’ve come too,” said Harry 
bitterly. “I bet you anything Fudge would’ve told 
Macnair to murder Sirius on the spot. ...” 

They watched the four men climb the castle steps and 
disappear from view. For a few minutes the scene was 
deserted. Then — 

“Here comes Lupin!” said Harry as they saw another 
figure sprinting down the stone steps and haring 
toward the Willow. Harry looked up at the sky. Clouds 
were obscuring the moon completely. 

They watched Lupin seize a broken branch from the 
ground and prod the knot on the trunk. The tree 
stopped fighting, and Lupin, too, disappeared into the 
gap in its roots. 

“If he’d only grabbed the cloak,” said Harry. “It’s just 
lying there. ...” 

Page | 452 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




He turned to Hermione. 



“If I just dashed out now and grabbed it, Snape’d 
never be able to get it and — ” 

“Harry, we mustn’t be seen!” 

“How can you stand this?” he asked Hermione 
fiercely. “Just standing here and watching it happen?” 
He hesitated. “I’m going to grab the cloak!” 

“Harry, no!” 

Hermione seized the back of Harry’s robes not a 
moment too soon. Just then, they heard a burst of 
song. It was Hagrid, making his way up to the castle, 
singing at the top of his voice, and weaving slightly as 
he walked. A large bottle was swinging from his 
hands. 

“See?” Hermione whispered. “See what would have 
happened? We’ve got to keep out of sight! No, 
Buckbeak).” 

The hippogriff was making frantic attempts to get to 
Hagrid again; Harry seized his rope too, straining to 
hold Buckbeak back. They watched Hagrid meander 
tipsily up to the castle. He was gone. Buckbeak 
stopped fighting to get away. His head drooped sadly. 

Barely two minutes later, the castle doors flew open 
yet again, and Snape came charging out of them, 
running toward the Willow. 

Harry’s fists clenched as they watched Snape skid to 
a halt next to the tree, looking around. He grabbed 
the cloak and held it up. 



Page | 453 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Get your filthy hands off it,” Harry snarled under his 
breath. 

“Shh!” 

Snape seized the branch Lupin had used to freeze the 
tree, prodded the knot, and vanished from view as he 
put on the cloak. 

“So that’s it,” said Hermione quietly. “We’re all down 
there ... and now we’ve just got to wait until we come 
back up again. ...” 

She took the end of Buckbeak’s rope and tied it 
securely around the nearest tree, then sat down on 
the dry ground, arms around her knees. 

“Harry, there’s something I don’t understand. ... Why 
didn’t the dementors get Sirius? I remember them 
coming, and then I think I passed out . . . there were 
so many of them. ...” 

Harry sat down too. He explained what he’d seen; 
how, as the nearest dementor had lowered its mouth 
to Harry’s, a large silver something had come 
galloping across the lake and forced the dementors to 
retreat. 

Hermione ’s mouth was slightly open by the time 
Harry had finished. 

“But what was it?” 

“There’s only one thing it could have been, to make 
the dementors go,” said Harry. “A real Patronus. A 
powerful one.” 

“But who conjured it?” 



Page | 454 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry didn’t say anything. He was thinking back to 
the person he’d seen on the other bank of the lake. He 
knew who he thought it had been . . . but how could it 
have been? 

“Didn’t you see what they looked like?” said Hermione 
eagerly. “Was it one of the teachers?” 

“No,” said Harry. “He wasn’t a teacher.” 

“But it must have been a really powerful wizard, to 
drive all those dementors away. ... If the Patronus 
was shining so brightly, didn’t it light him up? 
Couldn’t you see — ?” 

“Yeah, I saw him,” said Harry slowly. “But ... maybe I 
imagined it. ... I wasn’t thinking straight. ... I passed 
out right afterward. ...” 

“ Who did you think it was?” 

“I think — ” Harry swallowed, knowing how strange 
this was going to sound. “I think it was my dad.” 

Harry glanced up at Hermione and saw that her 
mouth was fully open now. She was gazing at him 
with a mixture of alarm and pity. 

“Harry, your dad’s — well — dead,” she said quietly. 

“I know that,” said Harry quickly. 

“You think you saw his ghost?” 

“I don’t know ... no ... he looked solid. ...” 

“But then — ” 



Page | 455 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Maybe I was seeing things,” said Harry. “But ... from 
what I could see ... it looked like him. ... I’ve got 
photos of him. ...” 

Hermione was still looking at him as though worried 
about his sanity. 

“I know it sounds crazy,” said Harry flatly. He turned 
to look at Buckbeak, who was digging his beak into 
the ground, apparently searching for worms. But he 
wasn’t really watching Buckbeak. 

He was thinking about his father and about his 
father’s three oldest friends ... Moony, Wormtail, 
Padfoot, and Prongs. ... Had all four of them been out 
on the grounds tonight? Wormtail had reappeared 
this evening when everyone had thought he was dead. 
... Was it so impossible his father had done the same? 
Had he been seeing things across the lake? The figure 
had been too far away to see distinctly . . . yet he had 
felt sure, for a moment, before he’d lost 
consciousness. ... 

The leaves overhead rustled faintly in the breeze. The 
moon drifted in and out of sight behind the shifting 
clouds. Hermione sat with her face turned toward the 
Willow, waiting. 

And then, at last, after over an hour . . . 

“Here we come!” Hermione whispered. 

She and Harry got to their feet. Buckbeak raised his 
head. They saw Lupin, Pettigrew, and Ron clambering 
awkwardly out of the hole in the roots . . . followed by 
the unconscious Snape, drifting weirdly upward. Next 
came Harry, Hermione, and Black. They all began to 
walk toward the castle. 



Page | 456 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry’s heart was starting to beat very fast. He 
glanced up at the sky. Any moment now, that cloud 
was going to move aside and show the moon. ... 

“Harry,” Hermione muttered as though she knew 
exactly what he was thinking, “we’ve got to stay put. 
We mustn’t be seen. There’s nothing we can do. ...” 

“So we’re just going to let Pettigrew escape all over 
again. ...” said Harry quietly. 

“How do you expect to find a rat in the dark?” 
snapped Hermione. “There’s nothing we can do! We 
came back to help Sirius; we’re not supposed to be 
doing anything else!” 

“ All right'.” 

The moon slid out from behind its cloud. They saw 
the tiny figures across the grounds stop. Then they 
saw movement — 

“There goes Lupin,” Hermione whispered. “He’s 
transforming — ” 

“Hermione!” said Harry suddenly. “We’ve got to move!” 

“We mustn’t, I keep telling you — ” 

“Not to interfere! Lupin’s going to run into the forest, 
right at us!” 

Hermione gasped. 

“Quick!” she moaned, dashing to untie Buckbeak. 
“Quick! Where are we going to go? Where are we going 
to hide? The dementors will be coming any moment — 



Page | 457 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Back to Hagrid’s!” Harry said. “It’s empty now — 
come on!” 

They ran as fast as they could, Buckbeak cantering 
along behind them. They could hear the werewolf 
howling behind them. ... 

The cabin was in sight; Harry skidded to the door, 
wrenched it open, and Hermione and Buckbeak 
flashed past him; Harry threw himself in after them 
and bolted the door. Fang the boarhound barked 
loudly. 

“Shh, Fang, it’s us!” said Hermione, hurrying over and 
scratching his ears to quieten him. “That was really 
close!” she said to Harry. 

“Yeah ...” 

Harry was looking out of the window. It was much 
harder to see what was going on from here. Buckbeak 
seemed very happy to find himself back inside 
Hagrid’s house. He lay down in front of the fire, folded 
his wings contentedly, and seemed ready for a good 
nap. 

“I think I’d better go outside again, you know,” said 
Harry slowly. “I can’t see what’s going on — we won’t 
know when it’s time — ” 

Hermione looked up. Her expression was suspicious. 

“I’m not going to try and interfere,” said Harry 
quickly. “But if we don’t see what’s going on, how’re 
we going to know when it’s time to rescue Sirius?” 

“Well ... okay, then ... I’ll wait here with Buckbeak ... 
but Harry, be careful — there’s a werewolf out there 
— and the dementors — ” 

Page | 458 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry stepped outside again and edged around the 
cabin. He could hear yelping in the distance. That 
meant the dementors were closing in on Sirius. ... He 
and Hermione would be running to him any moment. 



Harry stared out toward the lake, his heart doing a 
kind of drumroll in his chest. ... Whoever had sent 
that Patronus would be appearing at any moment. ... 

For a fraction of a second he stood, irresolute, in front 
of Hagrid’s door. You must not be seen. But he didn’t 
want to be seen. He wanted to do the seeing. ... He 
had to know. . . . 

And there were the dementors. They were emerging 
out of the darkness from every direction, gliding 
around the edges of the lake. ... They were moving 
away from where Harry stood, to the opposite bank. 

... He wouldn’t have to get near them. ... 

Harry began to run. He had no thought in his head 
except his father. ... If it was him ... if it really was 
him ... he had to know, had to find out. ... 

The lake was coming nearer and nearer, but there 
was no sign of anybody. On the opposite bank, he 
could see tiny glimmers of silver — his own attempts 
at a Patronus — 

There was a bush at the very edge of the water. Harry 
threw himself behind it, peering desperately through 
the leaves. On the opposite bank, the glimmers of 
silver were suddenly extinguished. A terrified 
excitement shot through him — any moment now — 

“Come on!” he muttered, staring about. “Where are 
you? Dad, come on — ” 



Page | 459 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




But no one came. Harry raised his head to look at the 
circle of dementors across the lake. One of them was 
lowering its hood. It was time for the rescuer to 
appear — but no one was coming to help this time — 

And then it hit him — he understood. He hadn’t seen 
his father — he had seen himself — 

Harry flung himself out from behind the bush and 
pulled out his wand. 

“EXPECTO PATRONUM ” he yelled. 

And out of the end of his wand burst, not a shapeless 
cloud of mist, but a blinding, dazzling, silver animal. 
He screwed up his eyes, trying to see what it was. It 
looked like a horse. It was galloping silently away 
from him, across the black surface of the lake. He 
saw it lower its head and charge at the swarming 
dementors. ... Now it was galloping around and 
around the black shapes on the ground, and the 
dementors were falling back, scattering, retreating 
into the darkness. ... They were gone. 

The Patronus turned. It was cantering back toward 
Harry across the still surface of the water. It wasn’t a 
horse. It wasn’t a unicorn, either. It was a stag. It was 
shining brightly as the moon above ... it was coming 
back to him. ... 

It stopped on the bank. Its hooves made no mark on 
the soft ground as it stared at Harry with its large, 
silver eyes. Slowly, it bowed its antlered head. And 
Harry realized . . . 

“Prongs,” he whispered. 

But as his trembling fingertips stretched toward the 
creature, it vanished. 

Page | 460 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Harry stood there, hand still outstretched. Then, with 
a great leap of his heart, he heard hooves behind him 
— he whirled around and saw Hermione dashing 
toward him, dragging Buckbeak behind her. 

“What did you do?” she said fiercely. “You said you 
were only going to keep a lookout!” 

“I just saved all our lives ... ,” said Harry. “Get behind 
here — behind this bush — I’ll explain.” 

Hermione listened to what had just happened with 
her mouth open yet again. 

“Did anyone see you?” 

“Yes, haven’t you been listening? I saw me but I 
thought I was my dad! It’s okay!” 

“Harry, I can’t believe it. ... You conjured up a 
Patronus that drove away all those dementors! That’s 
very, very advanced magic. ...” 

“I knew I could do it this time,” said Harry, “because 
I’d already done it. ... Does that make sense?” 

“I don’t know — Harry, look at Snape!” 

Together they peered around the bush at the other 
bank. Snape had regained consciousness. He was 
conjuring stretchers and lifting the limp forms of 
Harry, Hermione, and Black onto them. A fourth 
stretcher, no doubt bearing Ron, was already floating 
at his side. Then, wand held out in front of him, he 
moved them away toward the castle. 

“Right, it’s nearly time,” said Hermione tensely, 
looking at her watch. “We’ve got about forty-five 
minutes until Dumbledore locks the door to the 

Page | 461 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




hospital wing. We’ve got to rescue Sirius and get back 
into the ward before anybody realizes we’re missing. 



They waited, watching the moving clouds reflected in 
the lake, while the bush next to them whispered in 
the breeze. Buckbeak, bored, was ferreting for worms 
again. 

“D’you reckon he’s up there yet?” said Harry, 
checking his watch. He looked up at the castle and 
began counting the windows to the right of the West 
Tower. 

“Look!” Hermione whispered. “Who’s that? Someone’s 
coming back out of the castle!” 

Harry stared through the darkness. The man was 
hurrying across the grounds, toward one of the 
entrances. Something shiny glinted in his belt. 

“Macnair!” said Harry. “The executioner! He’s gone to 
get the dementors! This is it, Hermione — ” 

Hermione put her hands on Buckbeak’s back and 
Harry gave her a leg up. Then he placed his foot on 
one of the lower branches of the bush and climbed up 
in front of her. He pulled Buckbeak’s rope back over 
his neck and tied it to the other side of his collar like 
reins. 

“Ready?” he whispered to Hermione. “You’d better 
hold on to me — ” 

He nudged Buckbeak’s sides with his heels. 

Buckbeak soared straight into the dark air. Harry 
gripped his flanks with his knees, feeling the great 
wings rising powerfully beneath them. Hermione was 

Page | 462 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




holding Harry very tight around the waist; he could 
hear her muttering, “Oh, no — I don’t like this — oh, I 
really don’t like this — ” 

Harry urged Buckbeak forward. They were gliding 
quietly toward the upper floors of the castle. ... Harry 
pulled hard on the left-hand side of the rope, and 
Buckbeak turned. Harry was trying to count the 
windows flashing past — 

“Whoa!” he said, pulling backward as hard as he 
could. 

Buckbeak slowed down and they found themselves at 
a stop, unless you counted the fact that they kept 
rising up and down several feet as the hippogriff beat 
his wings to remain airborne. 

“He’s there!” Harry said, spotting Sirius as they rose 
up beside the window. He reached out, and as 
Buckbeak’s wings fell, was able to tap sharply on the 
glass. 

Black looked up. Harry saw his jaw drop. He leapt 
from his chair, hurried to the window and tried to 
open it, but it was locked. 

“Stand back!” Hermione called to him, and she took 
out her wand, still gripping the back of Harry’s robes 
with her left hand. 

“Alohomoral” 

The window sprang open. 

“How — how — ?” said Black weakly, staring at the 
hippogriff. 



Page | 463 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Get on — there’s not much time,” said Harry, 
gripping Buckbeak firmly on either side of his sleek 
neck to hold him steady. “You’ve got to get out of here 

— the dementors are coming — Macnair’s gone to get 
them.” 

Black placed a hand on either side of the window 
frame and heaved his head and shoulders out of it. It 
was very lucky he was so thin. In seconds, he had 
managed to fling one leg over Buckbeak’s back and 
pull himself onto the hippogriff behind Hermione. 

“Okay, Buckbeak, up!” said Harry, shaking the rope. 
“Up to the tower — come on!” 

The hippogriff gave one sweep of its mighty wings and 
they were soaring upward again, high as the top of 
the West Tower. Buckbeak landed with a clatter on 
the battlements, and Harry and Hermione slid off him 
at once. 

“Sirius, you’d better go, quick,” Harry panted. “They’ll 
reach Flitwick’s office any moment, they’ll find out 
you’re gone.” 

Buckbeak pawed the ground, tossing his sharp head. 

“What happened to the other boy? Ron?” croaked 
Sirius. 

“He’s going to be okay. He’s still out of it, but Madam 
Pomfrey says shell be able to make him better. Quick 

- go 



But Black was still staring down at Harry. 

“How can I ever thank — ” 

“GO!” Harry and Hermione shouted together. 

Page | 464 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Black wheeled Buckbeak around, facing the open sky. 

“Well see each other again,” he said. “You are — truly 
your father’s son, Harry. ...” 

He squeezed Buckbeak’s sides with his heels. Harry 
and Hermione jumped back as the enormous wings 
rose once more. ... The hippogriff took off into the air. 

. . . He and his rider became smaller and smaller as 
Harry gazed after them ... then a cloud drifted across 
the moon. ... They were gone. 



Page | 465 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 





OWL POST AGAIN 



“Harry!” 

Hermione was tugging at his sleeve, staring at her 
watch. “We’ve got exactly ten minutes to get back 
down to the hospital wing without anybody seeing us 
— before Dumbledore locks the door — ” 

“Okay,” said Harry, wrenching his gaze from the sky, 
“let’s go. ...” 

They slipped through the doorway behind them and 
down a tightly spiraling stone staircase. As they 
reached the bottom of it, they heard voices. They 
flattened themselves against the wall and listened. It 
sounded like Fudge and Snape. They were walking 
quickly along the corridor at the foot of the staircase. 

"... only hope Dumbledore ’s not going to make 
difficulties,” Snape was saying. “The Kiss will be 
performed immediately?” 



Page | 466 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 



“As soon as Macnair returns with the dementors. This 
whole Black affair has been highly embarrassing. I 
can’t tell you how much I’m looking forward to 
informing the Daily Prophet that we’ve got him at last. 
...I daresay they’ll want to interview you, Snape ... 
and once young Harry’s back in his right mind, I 
expect he’ll want to tell the Prophet exactly how you 
saved him. ...” 

Harry clenched his teeth. He caught a glimpse of 
Snape’s smirk as he and Fudge passed Harry and 
Hermione’s hiding place. Their footsteps died away. 
Harry and Hermione waited a few moments to make 
sure they’d really gone, then started to run in the 
opposite direction. Down one staircase, then another, 
along a new corridor — then they heard a cackling 
ahead. 

“Peeves\” Harry muttered, grabbing Hermione’s wrist. 
“In here!” 

They tore into a deserted classroom to their left just 
in time. Peeves seemed to be bouncing along the 
corridor in boisterous good spirits, laughing his head 
off. 

“Oh, he’s horrible,” whispered Hermione, her ear to 
the door. “I bet he’s all excited because the dementors 
are going to finish off Sirius. ...” She checked her 
watch. “Three minutes, Harry!” 

They waited until Peeves ’s gloating voice had faded 
into the distance, then slid back out of the room and 
broke into a run again. 

“Hermione — what’ll happen — if we don’t get back 
inside — before Dumbledore locks the door?” Harry 
panted. 



Page | 467 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I don’t want to think about it!” Hermione moaned, 
checking her watch again. “One minute!” 

They had reached the end of the corridor with the 
hospital wing entrance. “Okay — I can hear 
Dumbledore,” said Hermione tensely. “Come on, 
Harry!” 

They crept along the corridor. The door opened. 
Dumbledore ’s back appeared. 

“I am going to lock you in,” they heard him saying. “It 
is five minutes to midnight. Miss Granger, three turns 
should do it. Good luck.” 

Dumbledore backed out of the room, closed the door, 
and took out his wand to magically lock it. Panicking, 
Harry and Hermione ran forward. Dumbledore looked 
up, and a wide smile appeared under the long silver 
mustache. “Well?” he said quietly. 

“We did it!” said Harry breathlessly. “Sirius has gone, 
on Buckbeak. ...” 

Dumbledore beamed at them. 

“Well done. I think — ” He listened intently for any 
sound within the hospital wing. “Yes, I think you’ve 
gone too — get inside — I’ll lock you in — ” 

Harry and Hermione slipped back inside the 
dormitory. It was empty except for Ron, who was still 
lying motionless in the end bed. As the lock clicked 
behind them, Harry and Hermione crept back to their 
own beds, Hermione tucking the Time-Turner back 
under her robes. A moment later, Madam Pomfrey 
came striding back out of her office. 



Page | 468 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Did I hear the headmaster leaving? Am I allowed to 
look after my patients now?” 

She was in a very bad mood. Harry and Hermione 
thought it best to accept their chocolate quietly. 
Madam Pomfrey stood over them, making sure they 
ate it. But Harry could hardly swallow. He and 
Hermione were waiting, listening, their nerves 
jangling. ... And then, as they both took a fourth piece 
of chocolate from Madam Pomfrey, they heard a 
distant roar of fury echoing from somewhere above 
them. ... 

“What was that?” said Madam Pomfrey in alarm. 

Now they could hear angry voices, growing louder and 
louder. Madam Pomfrey was staring at the door. 

“Really — they’ll wake everybody up! What do they 
think they’re doing?” 

Harry was trying to hear what the voices were saying. 
They were drawing nearer — 

“He must have Disapparated, Severus. We should 
have left somebody in the room with him. When this 
gets out — ” 

“HE DIDNT DISAPPARATE!” Snape roared, now very 
close at hand. “YOU CANT APPARATE OR 
DISAPPARATE INSIDE THIS CASTLE! THIS — HAS — 
SOMETHING — TO — DO — WITH — POTTER!” 

“Severus — be reasonable — Harry has been locked 
up-” 

BAM. 

The door of the hospital wing burst open. 

Page | 469 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Fudge, Snape, and Dumbledore came striding into the 
ward. Dumbledore alone looked calm. Indeed, he 
looked as though he was quite enjoying himself. 

Fudge appeared angry. But Snape was beside himself. 

“OUT WITH IT, POTTER!” he bellowed. “WHAT DID 
YOU DO?” 

“Professor Snape!” shrieked Madam Pomfrey. “Control 
yourself!” 

“See here, Snape, be reasonable,” said Fudge. “This 
door’s been locked, we just saw — ” 

“THEY HELPED HIM ESCAPE, I KNOW IT!” Snape 
howled, pointing at Harry and Hermione. His face was 
twisted; spit was flying from his mouth. 

“Calm down, man!” Fudge barked. “You’re talking 
nonsense!” 

“YOU DONT KNOW POTTER!” shrieked Snape. “HE 
DID IT, I KNOW HE DID IT — ” 

“That will do, Severus,” said Dumbledore quietly. 
“Think about what you are saying. This door has been 
locked since I left the ward ten minutes ago. Madam 
Pomfrey, have these students left their beds?” 

“Of course not!” said Madam Pomfrey, bristling. “I 
would have heard them!” 

“Well, there you have it, Severus,” said Dumbledore 
calmly. “Unless you are suggesting that Harry and 
Hermione are able to be in two places at once, I’m 
afraid I don’t see any point in troubling them further.” 

Snape stood there, seething, staring from Fudge, who 
looked thoroughly shocked at his behavior, to 

Page | 470 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Dumbledore, whose eyes were twinkling behind his 
glasses. Snape whirled about, robes swishing behind 
him, and stormed out of the ward. 

“Fellow seems quite unbalanced,” said Fudge, staring 
after him. “I’d watch out for him if I were you, 
Dumbledore.” 

“Oh, he’s not unbalanced,” said Dumbledore quietly. 
“He’s just suffered a severe disappointment.” 

“He’s not the only one!” puffed Fudge. “The Daily 
Prophet’s going to have a field day! We had Black 
cornered and he slipped through our fingers yet 
again! All it needs now is for the story of that 
hippogriff’s escape to get out, and I’ll be a 
laughingstock! Well ... I’d better go and notify the 
Ministry. ...” 

“And the dementors?” said Dumbledore. “They’ll be 
removed from the school, I trust?” 

“Oh yes, they’ll have to go,” said Fudge, running his 
fingers distractedly through his hair. “Never dreamed 
they’d attempt to administer the Kiss on an innocent 
boy. ... Completely out of control ... no, I’ll have them 
packed off back to Azkaban tonight. ... Perhaps we 
should think about dragons at the school entrance. 



“Hagrid would like that,” said Dumbledore, smiling at 
Harry and Hermione. As he and Fudge left the 
dormitory, Madam Pomfrey hurried to the door and 
locked it again. Muttering angrily to herself, she 
headed back to her office. 

There was a low moan from the other end of the ward. 
Ron had woken up. They could see him sitting up, 
rubbing his head, looking around. 

Page | 471 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“What — what happened?” he groaned. “Harry? Why 
are we in here? Where’s Sirius? Where’s Lupin? 

What’s going on?” 

Harry and Hermione looked at each other. 

“You explain,” said Harry, helping himself to some 
more chocolate. 

When Harry, Ron, and Hermione left the hospital 
wing at noon the next day, it was to find an almost 
deserted castle. The sweltering heat and the end of 
the exams meant that everyone was taking full 
advantage of another Hogsmeade visit. Neither Ron 
nor Hermione felt like going, however, so they and 
Harry wandered onto the grounds, still talking about 
the extraordinary events of the previous night and 
wondering where Sirius and Buckbeak were now. 
Sitting near the lake, watching the giant squid waving 
its tentacles lazily above the water, Harry lost the 
thread of the conversation as he looked across to the 
opposite bank. The stag had galloped toward him 
from there just last night. ... 

A shadow fell across them and they looked up to see a 
very bleary-eyed Hagrid, mopping his sweaty face with 
one of his tablecloth-sized handkerchiefs and 
beaming down at them. 

“Know I shouldn’ feel happy, after wha’ happened las’ 
night,” he said. “I mean, Black escapin’ again, an’ 
everythin’ — but guess what?” 

“What?” they said, pretending to look curious. 

“Beaky! He escaped! He’s free! Bin celebratin’ all 
night!” 



Page | 472 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“That’s wonderful!” said Hermione, giving Ron a 
reproving look because he looked as though he was 
close to laughing. 

“Yeah ... can’t’ve tied him up properly,” said Hagrid, 
gazing happily out over the grounds. “I was worried 
this mornin’, mind ... thought he mighta met 
Professor Lupin on the grounds, but Lupin says he 
never ate anythin’ las’ night. ...” 

“What?” said Harry quickly. 

“Blimey, haven’ yeh heard?” said Hagrid, his smile 
fading a little. He lowered his voice, even though there 
was nobody in sight. “Er — Snape told all the 
Slytherins this mornin’. ... Thought everyone ’d know 
by now ... Professor Lupin’s a werewolf, see. An’ he 
was loose on the grounds las’ night. ... He’s packin’ 
now, o’ course.” 

“He’s packing?” said Harry, alarmed. “Why?” 

“Leavin’, isn’ he?” said Hagrid, looking surprised that 
Harry had to ask. “Resigned firs’ thing this mornin’. 
Says he can’t risk it happenin’ again.” 

Harry scrambled to his feet. 

“I’m going to see him,” he said to Ron and Hermione. 
“But if he’s resigned — ” 

“ — doesn’t sound like there’s anything we can do — ” 

“I don’t care. I still want to see him. I’ll meet you back 
here.” 

Lupin’s office door was open. He had already packed 
most of his things. The grindylow’s empty tank stood 

Page | 473 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




next to his battered old suitcase, which was open and 
nearly full. Lupin was bending over something on his 
desk and looked up only when Harry knocked on the 
door. 

“I saw you coming,” said Lupin, smiling. He pointed to 
the parchment he had been poring over. It was the 
Marauder’s Map. 

“I just saw Hagrid,” said Harry. “And he said you’d 
resigned. It’s not true, is it?” 

“I’m afraid it is,” said Lupin. He started opening his 
desk drawers and taking out the contents. 

“Why?” said Harry. “The Ministry of Magic don’t think 
you were helping Sirius, do they?” 

Lupin crossed to the door and closed it behind Harry. 

“No. Professor Dumbledore managed to convince 
Fudge that I was trying to save your lives.” He sighed. 
“That was the final straw for Severus. I think the loss 
of the Order of Merlin hit him hard. So he — er — 
accidentally let slip that I am a werewolf this morning 
at breakfast.” 

“You’re not leaving just because of that!” said Harry. 
Lupin smiled wryly. 

“This time tomorrow, the owls will start arriving from 
parents. ... They will not want a werewolf teaching 
their children, Harry. And after last night, I see their 
point. I could have bitten any of you. ... That must 
never happen again.” 

“You’re the best Defense Against the Dark Arts 
teacher we’ve ever had!” said Harry. “Don’t go!” 

Page | 474 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Lupin shook his head and didn’t speak. He carried on 
emptying his drawers. Then, while Harry was trying 
to think of a good argument to make him stay, Lupin 
said, “From what the headmaster told me this 
morning, you saved a lot of lives last night, Harry. If 
I’m proud of anything I’ve done this year, it’s how 
much you’ve learned. ... Tell me about your 
Patronus.” 

“How d’you know about that?” said Harry, distracted. 

“What else could have driven the dementors back?” 

Harry told Lupin what had happened. When he’d 
finished, Lupin was smiling again. 

“Yes, your father was always a stag when he 
transformed,” he said. “You guessed right ... that’s 
why we called him Prongs.” 

Lupin threw his last few books into his case, closed 
the desk drawers, and turned to look at Harry. 

“Here — I brought this from the Shrieking Shack last 
night,” he said, handing Harry back the Invisibility 
Cloak. “And ...” He hesitated, then held out the 
Marauder’s Map too. “I am no longer your teacher, so 
I don’t feel guilty about giving you back this as well. 
It’s no use to me, and I daresay you, Ron, and 
Hermione will find uses for it.” 

Harry took the map and grinned. 

“You told me Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and Prongs 
would’ve wanted to lure me out of school ... you said 
they’d have thought it was funny.” 

“And so we would have,” said Lupin, now reaching 
down to close his case. “I have no hesitation in saying 

Page | 475 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




that James would have been highly disappointed if 
his son had never found any of the secret passages 
out of the castle.” 

There was a knock on the door. Harry hastily stuffed 
the Marauder’s Map and the Invisibility Cloak into his 
pocket. 

It was Professor Dumbledore. He didn’t look surprised 
to see Harry there. 

“Your carriage is at the gates, Remus,” he said. 

“Thank you, Headmaster.” 

Lupin picked up his old suitcase and the empty 
grindylow tank. 

“Well — good-bye, Harry,” he said, smiling. “It has 
been a real pleasure teaching you. I feel sure we’ll 
meet again sometime. Headmaster, there is no need 
to see me to the gates, I can manage. ...” 

Harry had the impression that Lupin wanted to leave 
as quickly as possible. 

“Good-bye, then, Remus,” said Dumbledore soberly. 
Lupin shifted the grindylow tank slightly so that he 
and Dumbledore could shake hands. Then, with a 
final nod to Harry and a swift smile, Lupin left the 
office. 

Harry sat down in his vacated chair, staring glumly at 
the floor. He heard the door close and looked up. 
Dumbledore was still there. 

“Why so miserable, Harry?” he said quietly. “You 
should be very proud of yourself after last night.” 



Page | 476 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“It didn’t make any difference,” said Harry bitterly. 
“Pettigrew got away.” 

“Didn’t make any difference?” said Dumbledore 
quietly. “It made all the difference in the world, Harry. 
You helped uncover the truth. You saved an innocent 
man from a terrible fate.” 

Terrible. Something stirred in Harry’s memory. 

Greater and more terrible than ever before ... Professor 
Trelawney’s prediction! 

“Professor Dumbledore — yesterday, when I was 
having my Divination exam, Professor Trelawney went 
very — very strange.” 

“Indeed?” said Dumbledore. “Er — stranger than 
usual, you mean?” 

“Yes . . . her voice went all deep and her eyes rolled 
and she said ... she said Voldemort’s servant was 
going to set out to return to him before midnight. ... 
She said the servant would help him come back to 
power.” Harry stared up at Dumbledore. “And then 
she sort of became normal again, and she couldn’t 
remember anything she’d said. Was it — was she 
making a real prediction?” 

Dumbledore looked mildly impressed. 

“Do you know, Harry, I think she might have been,” 
he said thoughtfully. “Who’d have thought it? That 
brings her total of real predictions up to two. I should 
offer her a pay raise. ...” 

“But — ” Harry looked at him, aghast. How could 
Dumbledore take this so calmly? 



Page | 477 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“But — I stopped Sirius and Professor Lupin from 
killing Pettigrew! That makes it my fault if Voldemort 
comes back!” 



“It does not,” said Dumbledore quietly. “Hasn’t your 
experience with the Time-Turner taught you anything, 
Harry? The consequences of our actions are always so 
complicated, so diverse, that predicting the future is a 
very difficult business indeed. ... Professor Trelawney, 
bless her, is living proof of that. ... You did a very 
noble thing, in saving Pettigrew’s life.” 

“But if he helps Voldemort back to power — !” 

“Pettigrew owes his life to you. You have sent 
Voldemort a deputy who is in your debt. ... When one 
wizard saves another wizard’s life, it creates a certain 
bond between them ... and I’m much mistaken if 
Voldemort wants his servant in the debt of Harry 
Potter.” 

“I don’t want a connection with Pettigrew!” said Harry. 
“He betrayed my parents!” 

“This is magic at its deepest, its most impenetrable, 
Harry. But trust me ... the time may come when you 
will be very glad you saved Pettigrew’s life.” 

Harry couldn’t imagine when that would be. 
Dumbledore looked as though he knew what Harry 
was thinking. 

“I knew your father very well, both at Hogwarts and 
later, Harry,” he said gently. “He would have saved 
Pettigrew too, I am sure of it.” 

Harry looked up at him. Dumbledore wouldn’t laugh 
— he could tell Dumbledore . . . 

Page | 478 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“I thought it was my dad who’d conjured my 
Patronus. I mean, when I saw myself across the lake 
...I thought I was seeing him.” 

“An easy mistake to make,” said Dumbledore softly. “I 
expect you 11 tire of hearing it, but you do look 
extraordinarily like James. Except for the eyes ... you 
have your mother’s eyes.” 

Harry shook his head. 

“It was stupid, thinking it was him,” he muttered. “I 
mean, I knew he was dead.” 

“You think the dead we loved ever truly leave us? You 
think that we don’t recall them more clearly than ever 
in times of great trouble? Your father is alive in you, 
Harry, and shows himself most plainly when you have 
need of him. How else could you produce that 
particular Patronus? Prongs rode again last night.” 

It took a moment for Harry to realize what 
Dumbledore had said. 

“Last night Sirius told me all about how they became 
Animagi,” said Dumbledore, smiling. “An 
extraordinary achievement — not least, keeping it 
quiet from me. And then I remembered the most 
unusual form your Patronus took, when it charged 
Mr. Malfoy down at your Quidditch match against 
Ravenclaw. You know, Harry, in a way, you did see 
your father last night. ... You found him inside 
yourself.” 

And Dumbledore left the office, leaving Harry to his 
very confused thoughts. 



Page | 479 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Nobody at Hogwarts now knew the truth of what had 
happened the night that Sirius, Buckbeak, and 
Pettigrew had vanished except Harry, Ron, Hermione, 
and Professor Dumbledore. As the end of term 
approached, Harry heard many different theories 
about what had really happened, but none of them 
came close to the truth. 

Malfoy was furious about Buckbeak. He was 
convinced that Hagrid had found a way of smuggling 
the hippogriff to safety, and seemed outraged that he 
and his father had been outwitted by a gamekeeper. 
Percy Weasley, meanwhile, had much to say on the 
subject of Sirius’s escape. 

“If I manage to get into the Ministry, I’ll have a lot of 
proposals to make about Magical Law Enforcement!” 
he told the only person who would listen — his 
girlfriend, Penelope. 

Though the weather was perfect, though the 
atmosphere was so cheerful, though he knew they 
had achieved the near impossible in helping Sirius to 
freedom, Harry had never approached the end of a 
school year in worse spirits. 

He certainly wasn’t the only one who was sorry to see 
Professor Lupin go. The whole of Harry’s Defense 
Against the Dark Arts class was miserable about his 
resignation. 

“Wonder what they’ll give us next year?” said Seamus 
Finnigan gloomily. 

“Maybe a vampire,” suggested Dean Thomas 
hopefully. 

It wasn’t only Professor Lupin’s departure that was 
weighing on Harry’s mind. He couldn’t help thinking a 

Page | 480 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




lot about Professor Trelawney’s prediction. He kept 
wondering where Pettigrew was now, whether he had 
sought sanctuary with Voldemort yet. But the thing 
that was lowering Harry’s spirits most of all was the 
prospect of returning to the Dursleys. For maybe half 
an hour, a glorious half hour, he had believed he 
would be living with Sirius from now on . . . his 
parents’ best friend. ... It would have been the next 
best thing to having his own father back. And while 
no news of Sirius was definitely good news, because it 
meant he had successfully gone into hiding, Harry 
couldn’t help feeling miserable when he thought of 
the home he might have had, and the fact that it was 
now impossible. 

The exam results came out on the last day of term. 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione had passed every subject. 
Harry was amazed that he had got through Potions. 
He had a shrewd suspicion that Dumbledore might 
have stepped in to stop Snape failing him on purpose. 
Snape’s behavior toward Harry over the past week 
had been quite alarming. Harry wouldn’t have 
thought it possible that Snape’s dislike for him could 
increase, but it certainly had. A muscle twitched 
unpleasantly at the corner of Snape’s thin mouth 
every time he looked at Harry, and he was constantly 
flexing his fingers, as though itching to place them 
around Harry’s throat. 

Percy had got his top-grade N.E.W.T.s; Fred and 
George had scraped a handful of O.W.L.s each. 
Gryffindor House, meanwhile, largely thanks to their 
spectacular performance in the Quidditch Cup, had 
won the House championship for the third year 
running. This meant that the end of term feast took 
place amid decorations of scarlet and gold, and that 
the Gryffindor table was the noisiest of the lot, as 
everybody celebrated. Even Harry managed to forget 



Page | 481 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




about the journey back to the Dursleys the next day 
as he ate, drank, talked, and laughed with the rest. 



As the Hogwarts Express pulled out of the station the 
next morning, Hermione gave Harry and Ron some 
surprising news. 

“I went to see Professor McGonagall this morning, just 
before breakfast. I’ve decided to drop Muggle Studies.” 

“But you passed your exam with three hundred and 
twenty percent!” said Ron. 

“I know,” sighed Hermione, “but I can’t stand another 
year like this one. That Time-Turner, it was driving 
me mad. I’ve handed it in. Without Muggle Studies 
and Divination, I’ll be able to have a normal schedule 
again.” 

“I still can’t believe you didn’t tell us about it,” said 
Ron grumpily. “We’re supposed to be your friends.” 

“I promised I wouldn’t tell anyone,” said Hermione 
severely. She looked around at Harry, who was 
watching Hogwarts disappear from view behind a 
mountain. Two whole months before he’d see it again. 



“Oh, cheer up, Harry!” said Hermione sadly. 

“I’m okay,” said Harry quickly. “Just thinking about 
the holidays.” 

“Yeah, I’ve been thinking about them too,” said Ron. 
“Harry, you’ve got to come and stay with us. I’ll fix it 
up with Mum and Dad, then I’ll call you. I know how 
to use a fellytone now — ” 

Page | 482 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“A telephone, Ron,” said Hermione. “Honestly, you 
should take Muggle Studies next year. ...” 

Ron ignored her. 

“It’s the Quidditch World Cup this summer! How 
about it, Harry? Come and stay, and we’ll go and see 
it! Dad can usually get tickets from work.” 

This proposal had the effect of cheering Harry up a 
great deal. 

“Yeah ... I bet the Dursleys’d be pleased to let me 
come ... especially after what I did to Aunt Marge. ...” 

Feeling considerably more cheerful, Harry joined Ron 
and Hermione in several games of Exploding Snap, 
and when the witch with the tea cart arrived, he 
bought himself a very large lunch, though nothing 
with chocolate in it. 

But it was late in the afternoon before the thing that 
made him truly happy turned up. ... 

“Harry,” said Hermione suddenly, peering over his 
shoulder. “What’s that thing outside your window?” 

Harry turned to look outside. Something very small 
and gray was bobbing in and out of sight beyond the 
glass. He stood up for a better look and saw that it 
was a tiny owl, carrying a letter that was much too 
big for it. The owl was so small, in fact, that it kept 
tumbling over in the air, buffeted this way and that in 
the train’s slipstream. Harry quickly pulled down the 
window, stretched out his arm, and caught it. It felt 
like a very fluffy Snitch. He brought it carefully inside. 
The owl dropped its letter onto Harry’s seat and began 
zooming around their compartment, apparently very 
pleased with itself for accomplishing its task. Hedwig 
Page | 483 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




clicked her beak with a sort of dignified disapproval. 
Crookshanks sat up in his seat, following the owl with 
his great yellow eyes. Ron, noticing this, snatched the 
owl safely out of harm’s way. 

Harry picked up the letter. It was addressed to him. 

He ripped open the letter, and shouted, “It’s from 
Sirius!” 

“What?” said Ron and Hermione excitedly. “Read it 
aloud!” 

Dear Harry, 

I hope this finds you before you reach your aunt and 
uncle. I don’t know whether they’re used to owl post 

Buckbeak and I are in hiding. I won’t tell you where, in 
case this owl falls into the wrong hands. I have some 
doubt about his reliability, but he is the best I could 
find, and he did seem eager for the job. 

I believe the dementors are still searching for me, but 
they haven’t a hope of finding me here. I am planning 
to allow some Muggles to glimpse me soon, a long way 
from Hogwarts, so that the security on the castle will 
be lifted. 

There is something I never got around to telling you 
during our brief meeting. It was I who sent you the 
Firebolt — 

“Ha!” said Hermione triumphantly. “See! I told you it 
was from him!” 

“Yes, but he hadn’t jinxed it, had he?” said Ron. 
“Ouch!” The tiny owl, now hooting happily in his 
hand, had nibbled one of his fingers in what it 
seemed to think was an affectionate way. 

Page | 484 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




Crookshanks took the order to the Owl Office for me. I 
used your name but told them to take the gold from my 
own Gringotts vault. Please consider it as thirteen 
birthdays’ worth of presents from your godfather. 

I would also like to apologize for the fright I think I 
gave you that night last year when you left your 
uncle’s house. I had only hoped to get a glimpse of you 
before starting my journey north, but I think the sight 
of me alarmed you. 

I am enclosing something else for you, which I think 
will make your next year at Hogwarts more enjoyable. 

If ever you need me, send word. Your owl will find me. 

I’ll write again soon. 

Sirius 

Harry looked eagerly inside the envelope. There was 
another piece of parchment in there. He read it 
through quickly and felt suddenly as warm and 
contented as though he’d swallowed a bottle of hot 
butterbeer in one gulp. 

I, Sirius Black, Harry Potter’s godfather, hereby give 
him permission to visit Hogsmeade on weekends. 

“That’ll be good enough for Dumbledore!” said Harry 
happily. He looked back at Sirius’s letter. 

“Hang on, there’s a P.S. ...” 

I thought your friend Ron might like to keep this owl, 
as it’s my fault he no longer has a rat. 

Ron’s eyes widened. The minute owl was still hooting 
excitedly. 

Page | 485 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Keep him?” he said uncertainly. He looked closely at 
the owl for a moment; then, to Harry’s and 
Hermione’s great surprise, he held him out for 
Crookshanks to sniff. 

“What do’you reckon?” Ron asked the cat. “Definitely 
an owl?” 

Crookshanks purred. 

“That’s good enough for me,” said Ron happily. “He’s 
mine.” 

Harry read and reread the letter from Sirius all the 
way back into King’s Cross station. It was still 
clutched tightly in his hand as he, Ron, and 
Hermione stepped back through the barrier of 
platform nine and three-quarters. Harry spotted 
Uncle Vernon at once. He was standing a good 
distance from Mr. and Mrs. Weasley, eyeing them 
suspiciously, and when Mrs. Weasley hugged Harry in 
greeting, his worst suspicions about them seemed 
confirmed. 

“I’ll call about the World Cup!” Ron yelled after Harry 
as Harry bid him and Hermione good-bye, then 
wheeled the trolley bearing his trunk and Hedwig’s 
cage toward Uncle Vernon, who greeted him in his 
usual fashion. 

“What’s that?” he snarled, staring at the envelope 
Harry was still clutching in his hand. “If it’s another 
form for me to sign, you’ve got another — ” 

“It’s not,” said Harry cheerfully. “It’s a letter from my 
godfather.” 

“Godfather?” sputtered Uncle Vernon. “You haven’t 
got a godfather!” 

Page | 486 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




“Yes, I have,” said Harry brightly. “He was my mum 
and dad’s best friend. He’s a convicted murderer, but 
he’s broken out of wizard prison and he’s on the run. 
He likes to keep in touch with me, though ... keep up 
with my news ... check if I’m happy. ...” 

And, grinning broadly at the look of horror on Uncle 
Vernon’s face, Harry set off toward the station exit, 
Hedwig rattling along in front of him, for what looked 
like a much better summer than the last. 



Page | 487 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling 




